103 The Ferocious Elephant 
[Tape X, Side 1]
	1 Once upon a time there was a certain man.1 2 He saw someone2 taking care of 
a grazing elephant3 someplace,4 [and said] "Friend, is your elephant dangerous--is he 
dangerous?"5
	3 "Sure he's an elephant! Sure he's an elephant!"5
	4 "Is your elephant dangerous? Is he dangerous, friend?"5
	5 "Sure he's an elephant! Sure he's an elephant!"5
	6 "Boys,6 he says it's dangerous. Let's run!" he said. 7 "Vamoose, vamoose!"7
	7 "Where are you going?"5 [said the Shan].
	8 "Vamoose, vamoose!"6
Exegesis 
[Another Lahu tries to explain the story we've just heard:]
	1 What he was saying just now, see, [was this]: "sa-hai" means "friend." 2 Then 
"s‡ can n___ cˆ t__ h‰8 means "In your elephant dangerous (cˆ)?" 3. But to the Shan, 
"cˆ(n) meant "elephant." 4 So it was as if he'd said "[In your elephant on] elephant" to 
the Shan.
	5 So then, he was very frightened and ran away and reached a thorn-tree which 
he climbed up. 6 Once he got up to the top of the thorn-tree, he couldn't manage to get 
down again. 7. So somebody had to put a ladder against9 [the tree] and take him 
[down].10

Note: Since the Lahu word cˆ(n) 'ferocious, dangerous' is a yes <Kyam from Shan, 
anyway, it is hard to see how the Shan could have misunderstood the Lahu's intent. 
CHECK pronunciation of Shan 'elephant' as. 'fierce.' Maybe cˆ is native Lahu. 

1. I.e., a Lahu. 
2. I.e., a Shan.
3. h__ 'to lead to pasture; look after a grazing animal.'
4. ™ h_ _ ™ _ 'there, someplace.' The narrator uses the variant h_ of the topic Pn _ for the 
sake of a triple pun with h_ 'elephant' and h__ 'care for an animal.'
5. These sentences are in Shan in the original.
6. This is the first time the narrator mentions that the Lahu has some boys with him, 
though this seems to be an important convention in stories of this kind. See Empty 
Cremuts and A Good Cursing.
7. The Lahu here uses the Shan word p‰j 'go' to his companions. The jocular but urgent 
tone this adds is conveyed by the pseudo-Spanish 'vamoose.'
8. The wording here is slightly different from that of Sentence 2 above. 
9. c__ "affix to, strike to, put against."
10. The additional details supplied by the exegete in sentences 5-7 are by way of 
showing that he could have told the story better than the original teller. 

   
 
