107b The Tiger is Getting Ripe 
	1 Then there's the one about1 how once upon a time there were two men, a 
Yellow Lahu and a Black Lahu. 2 They went along a road and reached the place where 
the Lahu fields were. 3 When they got there, the Black Lahu climbed up on top of a log 
[overlooking the fields],2 to see how the Lahu paddy was ripening. 4 Then the Black 
Lahu went [back] and said to the Yellow Lahu, "Friend, down there our Lahu paddy is 
getting ripe! 5 And there's paddy getting ripe up there too!" 6 Now when the Yellow Lahu 
say "cà-m_,"3 they mean "tiger." 7 Thinking that['s what was meant], the Yellow Lahu 
took to his heels. 
	8 So then this Black Lahu chased after him, and they got up to the top of the 
mountain and finally came to a halt on the other side of the mountain. 9 When they got 
there, he4 asked, "What did we see that made you go running away like this?"5
	10 Then the Yellow Lahu answered, "Didn't you just say a tiger was coming?" 
	11 Afterwards the two of them had a good laugh over it. 

Footnotes
1. Lit: "after this has been done, once upon a time…."
2. That the fields were below where the men were standing is shown by nô _ 'up there' 
in Sentence 3 and by mô _ 'down there' in Sentence 4. 
3. The quid pro quo involves a three-syllable pun. In Y. L., cà-m_ means 'tiger' and lâ 
means 'come'; in B. L., cà means 'paddy,' m_ means 'ripe' and la is a Pv meaning 
'becoming, getting to be.'
4. The Black Lahu.
5. Lit., "having seen what, are you going fleeing?"
