110 The 'Empty Coconuts': the Lahu and the Shan Traders
[Tape X, Side 1]
	1 Once upon a time there was a certain man. 2 One day, leading a group of 
children, he went along a road. 4 As they were going along the road, they arrived at a 
certain place, where they saw a group of important-looking1 Shan {traders / merchants}. 
4 Well, there were very many of these important traders. 5 When he saw them, he said--
he asked the Shans [a question]. 6 What he said was, "~~~~~" 7 Which means "Sirs, 
friends, what are you carrying [with you]?"
	8 At this a Shan said, "~~~~~."
	9 So then he asked again: "~~~~?" 10 That is, "Sir, what are you carrying? 11 
Then the Shan answered him again, "~~~." 12 That is, the Shan was saying "We're not 
carrying anything. 13 Our saddlebags are all empty." 
	14 Then {the man / he} said to the boys: "Hey, boys, boys! They say they're 
carrying coconuts2! 15 Wouldn't you like to eat some? 16 If you'd like to eat some 
coconuts, why don't you all chip in some money3!" 17 So the've got some money 
together. 18 When he got the money they had collected, they said to the Shans, "Please 
sell us some coconuts." 
	19 At this the Shan said, "We have nothing to sell. 20 pao….." 21 That is, "Our 
saddlebags are empty4!"

Footnotes
1. ló < Shan lon 'great, big, important.'
2. The word pao (also < Shan - cf. Thai m_phváan) means 'coconut' as well as 'empty.'
3. phi __ k_: 'collect (__) and put in (k_) money (phi).'
4. CHECK. The Lahu gloss he gives is slightly inaccurate. The translation of 20 is 
simply "They're empty."
 
