115 Dividing a Slaughtered Pig Fairly
_á-to-do_ Village

1. Now I'd just like to tell you all about how the folks in _á-to-do_ used to slaughter a pig to eat.
2. Tell us until we're satisfied! [1]
3. Well, then, as for slaughtering pigs, we also just recently killed one. Today when we killed 
another one there were a few parts that we didn't divide up among us, so some people are 
probably angry.
4. That's right. A while ago a person took some pork and went home with it, [but] then I saw 
him bring it back again.
5. That guy was not happy about it.
6. He wasn't {happy/ satisfied}.
7. Hey, I'm not satisfied either!
8. We shouldn't do it that way. We ought to divide it up fairly to eat.
9. Even with the one that we slaughtered the other day, the butcher took the intestines all for 
himself. The head too. Even the skin was gone. Just the bones. I saw him take half of the head 
[over in this direction]. [2]
10. How many people are there who don't agree?
11. Three people.
12. That's a lot, that's a lot!
13. That is a lot—those who don't agree.
14. Yeah, so if you're not happy about it you should have said something to us before now. 
Since you didn't say anything we can't do anything about it now. Now there aren't even any 
intestines left. They've all been eaten up.
15. But they—the police—told us to divide it up fairly! [3]
16. Yes, but the insides and the head are for whoever does [the slaughtering] to eat!
17. From today {onwards/ on} we'll definitely divide up the intestines, the innards, and the head 
also!
18. {Never mind! So what! Who cares!} What we do from today onwards—{right now/ this 
time} you didn't tell us that, so it's all your fault.
19. That's right! About their saying "Divide it up fairly!" when I heard what they said to us, I 
disagree with you a little bit. [4]
20. If you guys aren't satisfied, if things aren't according to your wishes, why didn't you say 
anything when {that animal was slaughtered/ we slaughtered that animal} without dividing up the 
intestines?
21. When you {speak up/ say that} now {it's too late/ there's no time anymore}.
22. So in the future, if we're able to get another one [pig], just divide it up {equally/ fairly} to 
eat, every single part!
23. If you just keep quarreling about it, in the future you won't get anything to eat, you guys.
24. If we quarrel like this, when it reaches ("enters") the ears of the police we won't get anything 
to eat anymore, in the future!
25. Oh, let's just stop worrying about this. Even if one or two people aren't satisfied, most 
people are still {OK/ perfectly happy} with it.
26. I wonder how much there is ("it goes") [to eat] in the innards and the head?
27. Well, it doesn't amount to very much.
28. As for the head, there's not even any meat on it.
29. As far as the feet go, [we should] chop them into small pieces and mix them up thoroughly 
with the rest of the meat. [5]
30. If you guys aren't satisfied, go as anybody you want! [6] I don't care.
31. On the head there's nothing to eat. Look over there at the one [put] on the storage-rack. 
There isn't even any skin on it.
32. Wherever you make me ask, I'll ask.
33. From now on, you guys can be the ones to kill [the pigs]! We're not going to kill them 
anymore.
34. We won't do it anymore. Starting from today. Even if we do get another one to eat.
35. Now we won't get any more to eat.
36. Let those who aren't satisfied do it next time, fairly. This time we managed to do a job that 
we didn't want to do. We made a mistake. Since we didn't do it right, you guys aren't satisfied.
[A pause]
37. I bet [we you] can't even divide up the intestines!
38. Each person would get such a short piece—if we divide it up.
39. We can't do it with so many people!
40. So we wouldn't even get enough to make náam phrík. [7]
41. {We just might/ I suppose we could} use it to wind around a knife-sheath [8], eh?
42. I guess that's what we could do with it!
43. Come on, don't have a tug-of-war [9] with the pig {guts/ intestines}! They're not {that long/ 
long enough}.
44. Pig-guts would break if you pulled them like that—they're not bear-guts, you know!
45. Bear-guts, even more than bamboo, no matter who pulls it, it won't break.
46. Oh, we shouldn't {discuss this so much/ go so far as to quarrel over this}. [10]
47. We'd be embarrassed before {other people/ others}.
48. Since it's such a tiny amount of food, for us to talk about it at such length—if you look at 
those pig-guts, you practically can't divide them up at all, just [enough] to divide a few of us, 
maybe four people.
49. Because there are lots of people [in our village].
50. With 58 people [11] how can you go divide it up!
51. This time it's a done deal, it's all finished, there's nothing to be done about it. They're all 
eaten up.
52. Yep.
53. From today on let's divide up the intestines and the head [along with everything else]. [12]
54. That's what we ought to do. From today onward. There have been lots of people who are 
discontented.
55. Otherwise, if we have a chance to do it again in the future, [we should] set up a big wok down 
there in the headman's house, and all in the same place [we should] chop up all the intestines, and 
the meat and the feet and the head and put it all in and then {distribute it/ give it out} [for 
everybody] to take [13], and—
56. If we do it that way [people] wouldn't come to {eat/ get their food} all at the same time, 
[they'd] be embarrassed.
57. If there are people who won't eat, {never mind/ the hell with them}!
58. We probably wouldn't manage to divide it up.
59. Well, for my part, even if they don't give me stuff like the guts it's all the same to me.
60. Me too, even if I don't get to eat the guts—
61.—I'd be embarrassed about that! {talking over each other}
62. [The guts] stink of shit. [14]
63. I don't want any either. The headman says not to come divide it up in his house! From now 
on he says we should divide it down there at the police station!
64. [They] [pigs] eat people's doo-doo <giggles>! [15] The inside of their guts stinks like hell.
65. So from now on if we're lucky enough to get a chance to eat [a pig] again, who will kill ["do"] 
it?
66. Let's all do it together!
67. If that's not what you guys do you're just bearing a grudge against {me/ us}. [16]
68. [You should] do it after talking it over with the whole {community/ group}—in the future it 
shouldn't be done like it was this time, not like this time.
69. If you don't agree [with us], after you finish working over there [17], when it gets dark you 
can go down and light pine-torches and {do the dividing-up/ have it divided up}.
70. If we can't see [what we're doing], the dogs might bite into the meat and scatter it around 
[18], a real pain in the ass.  You could cut your hands with the knives.  If it's dark and you can't 
see.
71. If we do it that way [i.e., all night] that's what will happen to us who do the killing.
72. With us watching, they probably wouldn't grab at [the meat], if we've got torches lit.
73. Well, a while ago when we gave out a portion of meat to this guy, even when we sent a kid to 
take it to him [19], he said, "Don't come bringing me that, don't bring me that!  Better to give it 
to the dogs!" No matter who offered it to him he wouldn't take it.  He sent it back to me.  It's 
hanging up there, see it?! What are we going to do with it?
74. Who is it that you're talking about?
75. Cà-q_____.
76. After dividing it up for him if he won't eat it [20], I'll gobble [21] it up my self, if that's the 
way it is!
77. Well, I didn't know about this!  If I had known, it wouldn't have gone back and forth 
aimlessly like this.  Let's take it and just feed it to the dogs.  Even that would be better [than 
giving it to that guy].
78. Don't feed it to them.  I'll tuck into it!
79. Yes, well, there's still another thing.  {My brethren/ Ladies and gentlemen}, [22] are you 
feeling good?  You're feeling good.  Is the pork tasty?
80. (Two people): It's good!
81. Well then, {if we talk about/ speaking of} what we should do in order to clean up this village 
of ours, we must [first] sweep up all around the houses. [23][24]
82. We should keep sweeping the insides of our houses clean.
83. Another thing is, we should dig {latrines/ "shit houses"}.
84. And we should build sites for the pigs and coops for the chickens.
85. And if everybody washes all his clothes properly, we'll all be healthy and fit.
86. I'm not going to dig a latrine yet. Not long ago somebody dug one down there, but sand 
flowed into it and filled it up.
87. Yeah, then some people {make/ have} their {bedroom/ sleeping} and {kitchen/ cooking 
place} in the same place.  Sometimes ladles and blankets are all wrapped up together.
88. {That's normal for a Lahu!/ That's a Lahu custom!}
89. When certain people eat their meals, where the people sit the dogs sit together with them and 
watch, and they're eating too.  I've actually seen the dogs and the people sitting back to back and 
eating away!
90. That's what happens. Since people raise dogs…I guess I've had that experience too. You 
can't teach {them/ such people} anything. Such things.
91. Right you are! You could say it's insulting to a man's body. Absolutely!
92. As for a shit-house, I won't dig one.  I have three dogs. [25]
<laughter>
93. Those who have studied [in a Thai town] ought to do it, I guess. We need latrines.
94. We ought to do it.
95. We re-a-ally [26] ought to do it, I suppose!
96. Even though we've done what those who have come back after studying have told us to, look 
down there! [27]
97. They're instructing us to build pigsties and chicken-coops, but once we've built them the 
government doesn't bring us any [animals to put in them].  They've been abandoned, all empty.  
And they're actually rotting away.
98. Maybe the time hasn't come yet, for those down there.  They'll bring them to us.
99. The government won't give them to us! I doubt they'll ever give them to us.
100. They'll probably never give anything to us.
101. It's their fault for not giving us anything.
102. If we hadn't built them [the pigsties and chicken coops] it would have been our fault.
—————————————————————————————————————
[1] Emendation of text from qô_ ma_ qha ni ___ to qô_ ma_ ni-qhâ qha __ __
[2] This parenthesized phrase is a wordy attempt to translate the verb-particle lâ, which here 
signifies 'action performed in the direction of the speaker'
[3] The pig in question was supposedly donated to the village by a local squad of the Border 
Police.
[4] I.e., about the interpretation of the policeman's admonition
[5] 'thoroughly' translates the Vv p__ 'finish V'ing; V to a conclusion'.
[6] "Where you want to ask, go ask!" I.e., other people will vouch for the fairness of our 
behavior.
[7] A spicy condiment made of salty fish sauce, hot peppers, and bits of vegetables or offal.
[8] á-th__gú-pi 'coils (of string, bamboo-fiber, metal) holding together the two halves of a knife 
sheath.
[9] g___ dà_ ve (lit. "pull mutually").
[10]  qô_	dà_ : can either mean 'talk to each other' or 'quarrel'
         speak	MUTUAL
[11] _â chi	hí	g_â	(ve): This is actually a quadruple pun, meaning (as here) either '58 
people' or
       5	10	8	CLF people
   fish	DET	vie	catch	        'catch this fish by competing'!
[12] This translates kà_ (Punf) 'also'
[13] A four-verb concatenation: q___	pî	ph__		yù	l_
			          be new	give	send forth	take	SUSP
[14] nù 	qhâ: have a bitter stench
        stink 	bitter
[15] The speaker jocularly uses a childish way of saying "defecate" (qh__ ò ve) instead of the 
usual qh__ qò ve.
[16] Lit. "you (pl.) bearing a grudge [châ_] act toward us" [lâ 'non-3rd p. beneficiary].
[17] Building an airstrip. See Text # __
[18]This idea is concisely expressed by a two-verb sequence: chè_-	_ê_
								BITE	SCATTER
[19] Evidently sending a child to deliver the meat was an attempt to mollify the hurt feelings of 
some villagers.
[20] p__   ca_	 l_ "divide up for him to eat"
 SHARE FEED SUSP
[21] vâ: 'go at it vigorously' vivid pro-verb, here used instead of câ 'eat'.
[22] Lit. "older and younger siblings."
[23] á-qà_-á-ji: "outside between [the houses]."
[24] Sentences 81-85 all end with the quotative Pnf cê, the function of which here is to stress 
that others [the Thai authorities] have told him [the headman] what the villagers must do to 
improve hygiene.
[25] Dogs are known for their coprophagic propensities.
[26] Spoken with exaggerated intonation of the final particle.
[27] I.e., at the Thai authorities down in the plains.
