121 A Smoker and a Non-Smoker Dispute a Pipe
<See also 82a for a longer version>

1. Well, I'll just tell a story about a smoker and a non-smoker in the old days, okay?

2. To all of you.

3. Once upon a time a person who was not a smoker saw somebody else's beautiful pipe and 
coveted it very much, wanting badly to get it [for himself].

4. This smoker was very happy with his pipe.

5. So one day, since the non-smoker wanted to get it [so bad], he went had stole it, that pipe.

6. {When/Since} he stole it, these two {people/guys} then {sued each other/went to court}.

7. These two people, the smoker and the non-smoker, went at each other in a great court case.

8. When they arrived at the official place [1] for their trial, they had to litigate [2] for a very long 
time.

9. It could not be done for them quickly.

10. When they got there the smoker had been very angry, since he treasured his possession so 
much.

11. The non-smoker wanted it so badly, since the pipe was so beautiful, so he stole it.

12. So then having discussed it vigorously, and argued and argued with each other, when they got 
to the great courtroom, the {judges/officials} [3] thought it over and instructed them thus:

"If you are a smoker, {stuff in/crumple up} the [right amount of] tobacco," they said.

13. So they made the pipe-thief {stuff in/crumple} tobacco, and also made the smoker {stuff 
in/crumple} tobacco, both of them.

14. As for the non-smoker. the tobacco that he took and stuffed into the pipe was way too 
much!

15. It just wouldn't fit into the pipe when he tried to pack it in [4].

16. As for the smoker, he only stuffed a small amount into the pipe, so it fit properly.

17. So that non-smoker who desired somebody else's possession and stole it dod not win.

18. He committed a grievous offense [5], not even being a smoker himself, yet still desiring 
another's possession and stealing it.

19. When he was forced to stuff in tobacco, it was way too much, while the smoker put in 
exactly enough [6], so the smoker was able to get his pipe back.

Footnotes:

[1] __ k__ __: lit. "the big place"
[2] tá pî ve: pî (Vv) here shows an action by a third person that affects other 3rd persons
     Vn Vv
[3] khú tê pha_ : khú 'chief; lord; bigshot' < Tai (cf. Si khun).
[4] dô_ mâ d_ : lit "pack not fit." d_ is a resultative complement specifying the successful or
     Vn NEG Cr
non-successful completion of packing in.
[5] phî_ jâ : phî_ 'commit an offense' < Tai (cf. Si phìt)
[6] qay gà e: lit. "go/went and reach/reached"
     Vn Vv Pv
