128 The Widow and her Head-Child

1. Once upon a time there was a widow.
2. One day when this widow had gone to cut thatch-grass, she got terribly thirsty and looked 
around for water, but couldn't find any.
3. Then she scooped up and drunk the water that {was there/ had been left} in an elephant's 
footprint in an old abandoned field, and returned home.
4. Then not long afterwards she became pregnant, and gave birth to a {son/ child}.
5. This child had no body, but only a head—just a normal head.[1]
6. But the mother took care of {him/ it} properly, and after a fair amount of time had passed, one 
day when it was time to cultivate her field, she was going off to clear the undergrowth.[2]
7a. The head-child said, "Mother, don't you do the cleaning. Let me do it," he said to his mother, 
and
7b. The mother burst out, [3] "I {doubt/ don't think you} could do it!" she said, and
7c. The head child replied, "I can do it. Just leave me here and go back.
7d. "Pretty soon when it's getting dark come and carry me back," he said, and
7e. The mother for her part {did as/ listened to what} he said, and left him there.
8. When it got dark and the mother came back to {see [what had happened]/ find him}, she saw 
that all the clearing of the undergrowth had already been done for her.
9a. In the same way, [] when the time came for felling the large trees [] in the swidden, he said to 
his mother "I {know how to/ can} clearcut the field," and after he said that, his mother went and 
carried him to the field and left him there, and she [later] found that the field had been completely 
clearcut.
10. And then one day that country was about to be {invaded/ attacked} [] by others, and 
{people}{predicted/ foretold}[] that those others would win.
11a. Then he [the Head] said, "If you just let me fight all by myself, I'll win."
11b. And when he said that, the Kind said, "If you fight and win, I have six daughters.
11c. "Whichever one you want to marry, you may marry, and also I can give you about one half 
of my {country/ kingdom}," said the Kind.
12. Thereupon the Head-child went to fight, and conquered everything, and he [the King] gave 
him [his/ a] daughter and [one half of] the country.
13. Then one day, after the Head-child had gone [] to market, the {old lady/ mother-in-law} [] 
was tidying up the house, and accidentally {set fire to/ burnt up} the {place where the Head 
would {live/ be put}/ Head's living-place}, and when the Head-child got back from the market he 
no longer had a place to hide, and turned into a very handsome {person/ man}

Footnotes:
[1] ó-qo_ c_ tí, ó-qo_-_i_ c_ tí:
head extent only head extent only
 ó-qo_ is the "short form" of 'head', while ó-qo_-_i_ (with the addition of the morpheme for 
round objects) is the "long form". <Ref. to kh__-y__ and kh__-__.>
[2] h_ ph__ ve (OV) 'clear away undergrowth from a swidden with a heavy brush-knife'.
[3] "burst out" translates the emphatic particle qha after q___ pî 'say to'.
[4] "In the same way" translates th__ (Punf) 'also'.
[5] h_ thu ve (OV): "slash a swidden": clear a field by felling the big trees in an area before 
burning it off.  Here translated "clear cut".
[6] b___ yù ve: "shoot/ fight-take", i.e., be taken over by fighting/shooting.
[7] ___ dà_ ve: "calculated mutually"
[8] His means of locomotion is not specified.
[9] __-pi-ma: 'grandma, mother-in-law, old lady'. This refers to the Head-child's mother, who was 
evidently living with him and his princess.
