131 Struggling to Survive with Lazy Husbands

1. {My dear/daughter-in-law}[1], when you went to spend the night in the fields this week, were 
you able to harvest a lot of {rice/paddy}?

2. There was nothing {[for me] to/I could} get! Since I was carrying my whining baby around![2]

3. Grandma [3], how's it going with you? Didn't you get anything?

4a. I couldn't get anything.

4b. {Since/Seeing as how} I'm an old lady I can't move very fast.

4c. My knees hurt.

5. Younger sister, what about you?

6a. As for me, I did get something.

6b. But I still don't have enough to {live on/eat}

6c. I don't {have/own} any {trees/plants} [that produce things to eat].

6d. They're not bearing fruits.

6c. The rats and birds have eaten them all up.

7. So when will it [the rice harvesting] likely be finished?

8a. It's probably not finished yet, unfortunately!

8b. I guess it'll still be about a week before it can all be harvested.

8c. The starlings will eat the paddy too!

9. If [they/we] keep reaping for a week, will it be finished?

10a. It should probably be finished.

10b. But even when we've finished, there'll still be nothing to {eat/live on}.

10c. After it's [the reaping] done I guess we'll have to {thrash the paddy/do the threshing}.

11. We'll do the threshing.

12. When the threshing's done where will you [pl.] build your granary?

13a. I'll probably just carry it [the rice] home to store ["put in"].

13b. A little bit each day.

14. Younger sister, have you {made/built} [a granary] in the fields?

15a. I guess I'll have to thresh and store [the paddy] in the fields.

15b. {Seeing that/Since} I only have my {son/child} [to help].

16. Don't you have anybody to {carry it/do the carrying}?

17a. I've got nobody to do the carrying.

17b. There are only the two of us.

18a. Well in that case I can't imagine [4] how to go and carry it {to store/for storage}[5].

18b. {I'm so tired/It's so tiring}.

19a. {For my part/As for me}, I can manage to {carry it/do the carrying}.

19b. Even though I only have two people.

19c. The reason why we can carry it is because we didn't get very much.

20. How many hundred basketsful [6] are you likely to get?

21a. I supposed about one hundred basketsful.

21b. I don't see how it'll be large enough for us to live on.

21c. I don't know what went wrong this year [7].

21d. When we pile up the paddy we can't even make [proper] rice-{heaps/stoops/cocks} out of 
it.

21e. They just like sitting dogs [8].

22. How many heaps {will/did} you get?

23a. Probably only three or four.

23b. Little teeny ones.

24. In that case it should be enough to live on.

25a. I doubt it would be enough.

25b. We'll probably have to go buy [some] in order to eat.

26. So then next year what will you probably do?

27a. Next year {I'll/we'll} just have to borrow and borrow [9].

27b. From our friends and neighbors.

28. Grandma, where would you go to buy [rice] to live on?

29. Dear me, I'd probably just go to buy it from the Northern Thai [10].

30a. Instead of [going] to the Northern Thai, one probably couldn't go to share with Lahu 
friends.

30b. {Since/seeing that} nobody at all got [enough] rice.

31a. Oh, next year, we'll probably starve to death, eh?

31b. We don't have any money [11] either.

32. If we could only raise pigs and chickens and sell them [to the Thai] to buy food. [12]

33. I'm just so damn tired of living this way! [13]

34. There's nothing we can do about it!

35. Because [we're] not very good at {agriculture/working in the fields/farming}, since we're all 
so old.

<Pause>

36. Cà-h_ [14]: Na-thî, say that the work is so hard [in the rice swiddens] that you're hungry for 
food to go with the rice [15], tell your husband to go hunting for animals to eat.

37. What kind of food have you gotten to eat with your rice this week, my dear?

38a. We didn't get to eat anything at all, because we've been working so hard [16].

38b. If I say to my {old man/husband}[17] "Go hunting for something to eat," he doesn't go.

39. Didn't you even get to eat monkey-meat?

40. I tell you we didn't get to eat monkey-meat either!

41. And what kind of food have you been eating?

42a. Today I hiked [18] down there to the stream where they trade chickens so I could scoop up 
crabs!

42b. I got a turtle to eat.

<squeal of laughter>

43. (Cà-h_): Tell {Cà-m___'s/Jamaw's} father [19] to go over to Hwe_i-tû next week to hunt 
wild boar and spend the night there!

44a. I don't know—whether he'd go or not.

44b. The father of my Jamaw is a real {lazybones/sluggard}.

45. Just tell him "If you don't go we won't have anything to eat"—just tell him "Hurry up and 
go, we're starving! We can't hold out anymore!"

46a. He just won't go [do it] for you.

46b. He's like the my own children [20]

46c. Lazy.

46d. He just wants to stay at home, that guy.

47a. You ought to beat him!

47b. That's the way to treat old farts.

48. Tell him the kids are hungry for meat.

49a. You tell me to hit him, but he's stronger than me [21]!

49b. And I can't go and divorce him either.

50a. An old geezer like that you've got to {chase/drive} [into action] by hitting him!

50b. The type who doesn't take care of somebody like me.

51a. I don't know what to do.

51b. I'm so {depressed/miserable}[22].

52. Since you married him, you're stuck with him [23]!

53a. One problem is, he doesn't want to separate.

53b. The other problem is, I can't divorce him.

54a. Getting divorced is not according to God's will.

54b. Since you've already married him.

54c. Ever since you were very {young/small}.

55. {That's just it!/You've put your finger on the problem!}

56a. We've just got to accept it.

56b. There's nothing to be done!

56c. Even if we don't have anything to eat, we'll just starve together.

57. This week I don't know what we'll have to eat.

58. <Jokingly> You'll just have to kill a chicken in the morning [24].

59a. Kill {one/a chicken} tonight while you're at it!

59b. To eat tomorrow morning.

60a. As for me, I don't have anything to eat [25].

60b. I don't even have a chicken.

60c. When I go to dam [a stream] for fish, I don't catch anything to eat.

61a. I have a big male pig.

61b. I'll kill it to feed you.

61c. Next week.

62a. Even if you kill it {for/to feed} us we don't have anything to buy it with!

62b. We don't have any money.

63. I'll give it to you on credit!

64a. I don't see any way to get [money][26].

64b. If I should get ahold of a baht, I have to buy food for my kids to eat, clothes for them to 
wear—

65. [girl] Enough, enough already! [laughs]

Footnotes:

[1] nò à (voc) : nò (< PLB *nam _ _nam) was originally a kinship term for close female relatives, 
but is now usable as a friendly term of address to intimates of either sex. See DL:779.
[2] yâ-pû-yâ-___
[3] m_-tha_w: respectful term of address to an elderly woman ( < Shan)
[4] d__ â t___: lit. "think-not-emerge"
     Vn NEG Vv
[5] ca 	pû 	k_: a three-verb concatenation
go and carry	put in
[6] tû (Clf) < Shan tu_. See DL: 613.
[7] Lit., "I don't know how it went [this year] like this."
[8] I.e., the paddy just makes miserable little heaps the size of sitting dogs
[9] ca-chî-ca-_a_ (ElabV): when used alone, chî means 'borrow something that is to be repaid by 
an equivalent' (like money or food), whereas _a_ means 'borrow something that is to be 
returned as such' (like a tool); but in this ElabV the two verbs (here translated as 'borrow and 
borrow') merely reinforce each other.
[10] K__l__ g_ __ __: lit. "where the N. Thai are; in the N. Thai area"; __ 'region; area'
       N	Pn   Pn  Next
[11] The speaker uses the Thai-derived word _atâ(n) for 'money' rather than the native Lahu 
phu, evidently because the villagers' contact with a money-based economy was mostly restricted 
to their dealings with the Northern Thai.
[12] v__ l___ ve: 'buy [things] to eat'
       buy eat ("lick")
[13] This sentence ends with a string of four exclamatory Pnf's (yâ o nè lê) which follow a 
concatenation of three verbs (ph___ [Vn] 'be', b__ [Vv] 'be tired of', cà_ [Vv] [= jâ] 'very')
[14] A man sitting nearby prompts them.
[15] __-chî, lit. "rice lifter": food that is eaten with one's rice (cf. Thai khâaw 'rice', kàp-khâaw, 
lit. "with rice, rice go-with."
[16] I.e., since the work in the rice fields is so demanding, there's no time for any other kind of 
female subsistence activities like cultivating vegetable gardens.
[17] l__-pu_, ult. < Chinese __ (Mand. l_ofu_)
[18] kh__ 'march, hike' (prob. Yunnanese Chinese) is brisker in meaning than the usual word qay 
'go'
[19] I.e., the husband of the women he's talking to, who is Jamaw's mother. Referring to people 
as the parent of their child (a practice anthropologists call teknonymy) is widespread in SE Asia.
[20] I.e., my own husband.
[21] Lit., "I can't win [against] him."
[22] ph___ b__ jâ: lit. "very tired of living"
        Vn   Vv Vv
[23] Lit. "You can't separate anymore." Cf. tà (V) 'want to separate (as an unhappy spouse)'l 
DL 594-5.
[24] This is a wry bit of humor. If she had a chicken there would be no problem.
[25] The speaker pronounces the verb c__, 'have; be there' with exaggerated drawling intonation.
[26] To repay the owner of the pig.
