137 Man's Primeval Gourd Goes Missing, and God Looks For It

1. Once upon a time, when God created a [the first] human being, He created him to stay inside a 
gourd [1], it is said.

2. One day a bat lit off a tawkaw-fruit[2] so it fell right down, and since there was a barking-deer 
dozing under the tawkaw-tree, it fell crashing down on him, and because he was startled he 
suddenly jumped up and ran away into an old field. [3]

3. A jungle-chicken also flew over, and {alit/alighted} on a cassia shrub [4]

4. At that time a horse was also {eating grass/grazing} under the cassia.

5. That horse got very scared, so he ran away, and it {came to/ entered} the ears of an elephant.

6. Since the elephant was also very frightened, when he {was running/ran} away full tilt [5] he 
happened to step on the gourd and made it roll [6] [away down a slope].

7. One day when God came to visit the human, he couldn't find him, so he summoned all the 
animals and all the Trees, and asked them [where the human was].

8. Then when God asked the pine tree, the pine tree said "I didn't see."

9. God said, "When the human gets out [of the gourd], may he chop you down!"

10. And do not ever again {put out/sprout} sprouts [7]!" – because God said that, to this very 
day the pine tree puts out no sprouts.

11. Then when he went on to question the butterfly, since the butterfly also said "I didn't see," 
God said, "And as for you, every day, rain or shine, you will have to go look for food" – and 
since He said that, every day [butterflies] have to look for their food.

12. Then he went on to aske the peh-men[8] bug, and the peh-men bug said, "I saw it go down 
into the water down there, so since he told Him this God said, "May your kind always have 
{juice/liquid}!" – and because God blessed him thus, to this very day, his species produces a 
liquid.

13. Then God called all the animals together again, and made them [try to] take the gourd out 
from the water.

14. All the animals, all the different kinds of animals then [tried to] take it out, but they could 
not.

15. {A kind of crab/a member of the species called crab}[9] then {took/grabbed} it, and place it 
on the bank for Him.[10]

16. Then God went on to say: "Whoever manages to take this human out of the gourd will get to 
sit and eat the first fruits of their labor in the fields!" – when he said this, the starling said, "I'll 
get him out, if that's the way it is," and when God said, "If you can do it, do it!," the starling 
said, "My beak is very long!" and all day and all night he pecked [at it].

17. But even though that beak of his got all worn down, it couldn't pierce through.

18. Then the rat said in his turn, "I'll now get him out!" and he then gnawed away and pierced 
through.

19. When he pierced throught, unfortunately[11] he slightly bit the human's nose as he gnawed 
[12].

20. Thus to this day, [we] have {an indentation/ a dent}[13] between our eyes.[14]

Addendum (by Cà-lô and JAM) (NOT ON TAPE)

21. Thus to this very day, rats live secretly with humans, and have permission to keep secretly 
eating people's food and drink, people's rice.

Footnotes:
[1] The Freudian analysis of this creation myth is obvious: gourd = womb
[2] The t__-k_ i_ a kind of palm with very large leaves, bearing plentiful fruit.
[3] h_-_a_: a swidden allowed to lie fallow and revert to jungle over several years
[4] mì-c__: cassia (a shrub with red flowers)
[5] g_â-thè_
[6] g_a nâ_-pu: happen to (g_a) + step (nâ_) + roll (pu)
     vV V    V
[7] __-ca_ ca_ ve: lit. "sprout sprouts," a cognate object construction that does not translate 
well.
[8] p__-m__(n)-cè_: a tiny bee-like insect, the size of a fly, that secretes a very sticky liquid 
that makes beeswax. Its bite does not hurt, and its larvae are edible. See DL:848
[9] This very sentence, used as an example in DL 854, there receives a different translation, also 
possible out of context: "He took a kind of crab and put it on the bank for him."
[10] á-cè-gu tê c__
[11] _e_ particle expressing regret
[12] g___-h___: 'hit by gnawing'
[13] chè_-kú-l___
[14] This was illustrated for me by a sketch [INSERT]
