139 God Struggles with the Titan

1. I'd like to tell you brethren now about how long, long ago God [1] created mankind and created 
everything else.

2. Please listen carefully.

3. Long, long ago when g___-_a created mankind, he rubbed off the {crud/caked-on dirt} from his  
feet and his hands, and created human beings [with it], it is said.

4. After he had finished creating all the humans, he took a left-over lump and made a giant out of 
it, and so Cà-mû-cà(-qa)-p_[2] came into being.[3]

5. Then g___-_a said to all the human begins, "When your crops are ripe, all of you must offer to 
me the first-fruits," so since g___-_a had said this to the humans, when the crops were ripe they 
went and offered [the first-fruits] to g___-_a.

6. {The Titan/cà-mû-cà-p_} saw them from where he was at a point on the road that the humans 
were {traveling/going on}, and he asked "Where are you all going?", and the people said "We're 
going to make offerings to g___-_a, our first fruits," so the Titan said, "Make the offerings to me! 
What kind of God is there? It's me, I'm g___-_a," he said, scolding the humans.

7. [Addendum] These people were very afraid of the giant, so even though they didn't want to 
make offerings to him, they offered everything to him and went back home.

8. So then one day, since g___-_a didn't see any humans coming, he went to check things out, and 
when he met the Titan, cà-mû-cà-p_ said to him, "What have you come looking for?"

9, So g___-_a said to the Titan, "I've been thinking about how the human beings are doing with 
their cultivation, so I've come to check it out," and cà-mû-cà-p_ said:

10. "If you are really God, let's just have a contest and go at each other," he said, and they 
[decided to] have a race to pluck a certain flower growing on a tree.

11. So when they raced with all their might[4], when they went racing, g___-_a {clung/hung on} 
to the Titan's leg [5], and having arrived at the flower on the tree, g___-_ managed to pluck it.

12. Therefore {he/the Titan} did not prevail over g___-_a.

13. For the second time {he/the Titan} said, "If you are really God let's now play hide-and-
seek," so g___-_a made the Titan go and hide first.

14. But wherever he went to hide, g___-_a found him.

15. So then, this time it was g___-_a's turn to go and hide.

16. But when he went to look for g___-_a, he couldn't find him.

17. So because {he/the Titan} vigorously searched for him all over this {land/country}, that's 
why there are these mountains and valleys, so our ancestors have said.[6]

18. Then, when the time was up, since he couldn't find him, g___-_a said {"I've come 
down!"/"Here I am"}, and he jumped down right before his eyes.

19. When he said this, the humans—er, the Titan, since he was very proud, he was not satisfied, 
and when g___-_a created seven suns, he put seven iron helmets on his head.[7]

20. So {before long/soon} g___-_a gave him another punishment.

21. g___-_a extinguished the suns, [8] so [the Titan] made a notch in a pitch-pine tree [9], tied it 
to a buffalo born and set it on fire, so he could plow his field.

22. For this reason, {[up to] today/to this very day} buffalo horns {have ridges/are corrugated}.

23. And, in another place— [Hesitates]

24. Cà-l__ <prompting him> What about the dancing horses?[10]

25. So then, because g___-_a was angry, he {took/made} a dung-beetle and smeared poison on its 
horns, and made it go to {the Titan's dwelling place/where the Titan lived}.

26. When the dung-beetle arrived in the presence of the Titan, the Titan asked him, "Where are 
you going to?", and the dung-beetle said, "Oh, I'm going to the Jewel City."

27. "I've never been to the Jewel City myself

28. Such a tiny thing like you, how could you get there?" he said, and he slapped it hard, so that 
the dung-beetle's horn {pricked/pierced} his hand.

29. So it hurt him a lot and he got mad, and so he gave a kick with his foot too![11]

30. So then his foot also swelled way up on him, and his hand also swelled way up on him, and it 
hurt terribly, and this time he couldn't stand it any more.

31. So then he went to where g___-_a was, and hugged and besought him, "Please cure me with 
some medicine!" he said, and g___-_a said, "{There is/I have} a medicine."

32. So when the medicine is put on, when seven deep have passed—er, don't unwrap [the 
bandage] for seven days.

33. Soon after the medicine has been {applied/put on}, your flesh will get all tingly as it 
heals.[12]

34. That's just the way it's likely to be," he said, he said to him.

35. So then g___-_a took seven basketsful [13] of blowfly eggs, and put them on the Titan's foot 
and hand, and tied them up nice and tight for him.[14]

36. For seven days, {Cà-mû-cà-p_/the Titan} patiently suffered, no matter how much it hurt 
[15] him, and when the seventh day came and he opened up [the bandages] to have a look, all that 
flesh had rotted away since [the larvae] had eaten it up,[16] so he died.

37. So when he died, g___-_a called together all the human beings and all the animals, thinking he 
would have them bury him.

38. But the humans couldn't manage to bury him. since he was so huge, so g___-_a said to them,

38a. "Make a big cannon, and put [his body] into a grind-stone [17], then shoot it out," he said, 
and the people obeyed g___-_a's words, and made a cannon and shot him out of it, and to this 
very day there have come to be all these insects that still chomp into people [18], that still bite, 
that still drink our blood.[19]

39. As for these {bugs/mosquitoes}, the reason why they don't have ears like people is because 
they [their ears] were swallowed up[20], so it is said.

40. So then, since all the humans had obeyed g___-_a's words, and since they had dealt with the 
Titan just as he had {commanded/said}, g___-_a then called together all the humans and all the 
animals in order for them to sing and dance, and he made them all dance.

41. So then while all the animals were dancing for all to see, the dog, who also had horns, looked 
splendid as he danced.

42. So the barking deer said, "Mr. Dog, [21] please lend me your horns for a while!", and so he 
lent them to him, and after he had danced for a while he ran away.

43. To this day dogs can't stand the sight of barking deer, and they chase after them to bite them 
and bark, "Arf, arf!" which means "Gimme back my horns, gimme back my horns!", so they say.

44. After this, when the barking deer was fleeing the scene, he ran into somebody's swidden 
down in a certain place, where he happened to step onto a {plate/dish} where somebody was 
crushing chili-peppers in a field-hut, which is why the hooves of a barking deer stink bitterly of 
onions, so they say.

45. So meanwhile, as the buffalo and the ox were dancing, since he [the buffalo] had beautiful 
teeth, when he was smiling as he danced it was a fine sight to see.

46. So the horse said, "Mr. Buffalo, please lend me your teeth for a while, so I can just dance 
with them a little," he said, and the buffalo lent them to him.

47. So then the horse danced once around, then kicked up his heels and ran away lickety-
split.[22]

48. To this very day, when a buffalo says "aw-ehn, aw-ehn," when it's chasing after a horse it 
means "Gimme back my teeth!"

49. When a horse says "î-î-î" it's because he's laughing at the buffalo.

50. So to this day the reason why a buffalo can't {abide/tolerate/stand the sight of} a horse is 
because of this, so our {forefathers/ancestors} tell us.

Footonotes:

[1] g___-_a: [pre-Christian] 'Great spirit; Creator' (standing far above the nature spirits (nê); 
[Christian] reinterpreted as the God of the Bible. This word is left untranslated in the rest of the 
text. See DL 1148-9 and JAM 1985 "God and the ST copula".

[2] Sometimes translated below as 'Titan'.

[3] The gloss for cà-mû-cà(-qa)-p_ in DL:450 diverges somewhat from this story: "the first 
human being, a titan who pits his strength against his creator, "g___-_a."

[4] 'with all their might' translates the vivid vV g___

[5] g___-_a had miniaturized himself for this purpose.

[6] That is, the Titan's clumsy but awesomely powerful searching chewed up the landscape.

[7] In order not to be dazzled by so much light.

[8] Thus plunging the world into darkness.

[9] a-k__: 'pitch-pine tree'. Torches made from the vision of this tree were the traditional Lahu 
means of lighting their way at night.

[10] Cà-l__ is jumping the gun. See sentence [47], below.

[11] Also impacting on the beetle's horn.

[12] __-_a_ ca_ la ve: lit. "flesh will sprout."

[13] p_-ch___ ve 'tie up with a cloth; wrap around (as a bandage)': DL 843.

[14] ká-hô_ (N; clf.): a measurement equal to the amount of cooked rice that fits into a bamboo 
storage basket.

[15] chè_-nà ve: lit. "bite-hurt", i.e., stung painfully.

[16] h___-câ p__ ve: h___-câ means 'mix things together to eat'.

[17] I.e., grind up his body to powder, so it can be shot out of a gun

[18] chè_ câ ve: lit., "bite and eat"
       bite eat

[19] I.e., the powdery remains of the Titan's body turned into the insects that still plague us 
today.

[20] By the noise of the explosion when they were shot from the cannon?

[21] cà-ph__: ph__ 'dog' is here preceded by cà, the traditional prefix to male names. Actually 
boys born on the Day of the Dog were also traditionally given this name. See DL 448-451.

[22] 'lickety-split' translates the vivid vV g___, which means 'drag, pull' as a main verb.
