165 The Orphan's Riddles and the Trader
or
Parlaying a Chick to an Elephant-God

Note: The Orphan hero of this story, as in others in this collection [give Refs] is a sort of 
Trickster figure [give Refs]

(Recorded in Pashú Village)[1]

1. <clears throat>
Our great teacher [2] has come to visit our Pashu village, and he says he'd like to hear a 
traditional Lahu story.
2. So I'll just say one or two words.
***
3. Once upon a time there was an orphan child called Cà-_í-thî.
4. Since he was very poor he had nothing to eat from day to day.
5. So when he was off scooping up frogs, he put a dried one into a starling's nest.
6. Then he had a riddling contest [3] with a great Chinese {merchant/trader}.[4]
7. "What's that inside [the nest] over there?" The orphan asked him.
8. The Chinese trader said, "What should there be? There are only bird's eggs!," he said.
9. "Wrong!" he [the orphan] said. "Inside there is a dried-up frog."
10. So why don't you just climb up and get it, I'll watch you," he [the orphan] said.
11. When he [the trader] went climbing up to fet it and took a look at it, [the orphan said] "Do 
you see the dried-up frog?"
12. So they kept going on and on, and when they reached a certain place over there [5], the 
orphan looked around and saw a starling's nest.
13. "That starling's nest over there, what's inside it?" he asked him like a riddle.
14. "There are starling's eggs in it over there," he said.
15. "Wrong!" he said. "In it over there, in that bird's nest over there, there'se a dried-up eel," he 
said.
16. But the Chinese trader didn't want to believe what this orphan, Cà-_í-thî, was saying.
17. Since he didn't believe it, Cà-_i_-thî climbed up to look and found a dried-up eel.
18. So in this way the Chinese trader riddled with him, but nowhere [6] could he beat Cà-_i_-thî.
19. So they kept going on and on, and when they got to a certain place, he [the orphan] said, 
"Here, inside that tree-hollow, what is there?"
20. "Inside that tree-hollow there are bird's eggs," said the Chinese trader.
21. Cà-_i_-thî said, "You're wrong! Inside that tree-hollow there is a super-dried-up [7] pa-dâ-
qo_ [8] fish," he said.
22. But the Chinese trader didn't believe there was a super-dried-up pa-dâ-qo_ there.
23. "Well then, if you don't believe it, why don't you just climb up and have a look," he said.
24. "OK, OK, in that case I'll go try to climb up and get it," [9] he said.
25. When he went climbing up to try and get it, [the orphan said], "Is there a super-dried-up pa-
dâ-qo_ up there?"
26. In this way, Cà-_i_-thî was an orphan, he had to make a living by his riddles.
27. So they kept going on and on, and in a certain place over there, [the orphan] said, "Well, what 
is there on top of that tree?"
28. When [the trader] looked over there he said, "I don't see anything at all!"
29. "You're wrong!" he said. "On top of that tree there's a little baby dove."
30. So Cà-_í-thî_ scrambled [10] up to look.
31. SInce the Chinese trader didn't believe him, when he climbed up to look, he {caught/got} a 
little baby dove.
32. When he got the baby dove, the Chinese trader said, "Sell it to me! This baby dove of yours."
33. "I can't do it," he said. "Not me. {I have to take care of it./ It's mine to take care of.}."
34. Then, "Oh, please sell it, this thing of yours! So what is the price?" he said.
35 So the orphan said to the Chinese trader, "How much will you give me? How much will you 
give? How much would you be willing to pay? [11], Cà-_í-thî said.
36. "Well, then, for this baby dove I'll give you give rupees [12]," he said.
37. So the Chinese trader gave him five rupees.
38. He [the orphan] went back, and when he got home he bought a chicken [13], and he went off 
with that chicken he bought, and he {set that chick free/ released the chick} over there in a place 
where somebody was feeding a pig.
39. "Don't do that! My pig will trample it to death!" he [the pig's owner] said.
40. But he didn't listen. He set it loose.
41. So the pig chomped it to death over there.
42. When the pig bit it to death, he [the orphan] sobbed and sobbed, "Give me a pig, a piglet!" he 
kept screaming.
43. He blubbered and blubbered so much that he [the pig's owner] couldn't stand to hear it, so he 
gave him a piglet.
44. Then he went to let it [the piglet] loose where somebody's horse was being fed.
45. {"Feed some to mine too!"/"Let mine eat something too!"}
46. "Don't do that! Otherwise my horse will kick it to death," he said.
47. But he didn't listen. He went and let it loose in there.
48. So the horse chomped it to death.
49. When the horse had chomped it to death, again he sobbed violently, there next to where the 
horse was standing.
50. So that guy couldn't stand to hear it, and gave him a little foal.
51. When he [the horse's owner] had given him [the orphan] the foal, he went to release it in a 
place over there where somebody's elephant was feeding.
52. The elephant chomped it to death.
53. So he sobbed and sobbed, and it was unbearable, so he was given a goad for prodding 
elephants.
54. Then [the elephant owner] said, "This goad of mine, if you poke a dead person with it he'll 
come back to life," so he went over there to where there was a dead person, and (the orphan) 
poked him with all his might, but he didn't come back to life.
55. So then they took him and threw him out [from where the funeral was].

Footnotes:
[1] Lahu village in the Chiengdao nikhom, above Hwè-tà_ (dissolved ca. 1969). See DL:803, GL 
p. xliv.
[2] _a_la_-ló: polite term of reference for the author.
[3] t__ fá-e dà_ ve: lit. "use hidden words with each other."
[4] As will be mentioned explicitly later Sentences [#26], the impoverished orphan had to live by 
his wits. The orphan and the trader evidently hit it off, since they continued on their travels 
together.
[5] ô __, ô kà_ 'over there' is used throughout this story as a vague locative like 'in a certain 
place'.
[6] qhà-nî kà kà_: lit. "even how many places."
     Num clf Punf
[7] __-gwê _wî_: __-gwê (~ __-kwi) 'something dried out; _wî_ (Nlim) 'the utmost; highest degree'. 
GL 3.632, 6.114; DL: 1249-50.
[8] A kind of edible black fish about two inches long [Channa striatus], called paa-kâa in N. Thai.
[9] A four-verb concatenation: ca go and (vV) tâ_ climb (Vn) yù take (Vv) ni try (Vv)
[10] tâ_ climb (Vn) ni look (Vv) gâ_ scratch (Vv): gâ_ (lit. 'scratch') is used as a Vv connoting 
lively action.
[11] ni-qhâ __ ve: 'be satisfied; willing,' lit. "heart-path is {stable/ dead}."
[12] _â th___: a th___ is a Burmese rupee or kyat.
[13] Actually a baby chick, as we find out later in the sentence.
