28 The Blind Man and the Cripple

or: The Advantages of Faith in Fortune-tellers
or: The Power of Positive Thinking

Huey Tat 3/9/65

1. Once upon a time there were two people who were friends.
2. One of them was blind, and the other was a cripple [].
3. While the two of them were friends, one day they had an idea, and they both went together to 
a fortune-teller [] to ask how his eyes could come to see and how his leg(s) could become straight.
4. When the two of them went to the fortune-teller, the fortune-teller said to them, "On your 
way going [back], above you on the road when you see a bird's nest in the crutch of a tree, make 
the blind man climb up and take it," he said.
5. Just exactly as the fortune-teller had said, as the two of them were going on their way, when 
the cripple looked upwards, he saw a bird's nest.
6. Since he caught side of the bird's nest, he told the blind man to climb up.
7. The blind man said, "Since my eyes {are blind/ don't see}, I can't see all these things.
8. "I can't climb up," he said.
9. But the cripple said, "You can climb up.
10. "I'll show you how," he said.
11. As the blind man was climbing, at a certain moment he said, "Have I {got there/reached it}?" 
he asked.
12. But his friend said, "You're not there yet.  Keep on climbing a little."
13. After he had climbed some more, when he [the blind man] asked again, "You got there!" he 
[the cripple] said.
14. When he [the cripple] said "You got there!" since he [the blind man] really wanted to see, he 
opened his eyes wide with all his might, and all of a sudden his eyes could see.
15. In just the same [magical] way, when he took the bird's eggs in his hand, these eggs turned 
into a snake, as because he was as terrified he dropped it right towards the place where his friend 
was sitting, at which point his friend also became terrified, so he suddenly jumped up and his 
[crippled] leg straightened out.
16. So then, we Lahu of this generation also ought to learn from these two people and take it to 
heart [].
17. Since they heeded the words of the fortune-teller, we've learned that even the blind man got 
to see again.
18. We've learned also that the cripple's leg straightened out.
19. Everybody who {is heedful/ takes good advice}, their descendants and all of their relatives as 
well, if they take all this to heart it will be good.
20. Thus our Lahu ancestors told us long ago.

Footnotes:

[1] kh_-q___-pa_: lit. 'one with a crooked leg'
[2] m__-pa_: 'medicine man; fortune-teller; seer; magician; spirit-doctor; shaman' (DL:1029)
[3] Lit., "If we absorb the lesson of these two people it is good." hên-yù: 'learn from, get 
something out of'.
