30 The [Blind] Men and the Elephant

1. Once upon a time there was a great big white elephant.
2. This great elephant was tethered outside [of a house].
3. While it was tethered there, there were twelve [blind] people inside the house.[1]
4. These twelve people, one after the other, went and touched [it].
5. When the first person touched it happened to touch a tusk, he said, "What we call an elephant 
is as sharp as a knife!"
6. He {went/came} back in, and the chief clerk[2] wrote it down in his book.
7. When they sent the second man [to check out the elephant], since he happened to touch 
around its ribs, he said, "It's like a fenced wall!" and the scribe wrote it down.
8. One opinions, two opinions, a third opinion—when they sent out the third person, he 
happened to touch a leg, so he said, "The so-called elephant is like a mortar because it has a tree-
trunk,[3] and a flat foot."
9. When they sent out the fourth person—like—he said, "The so-called elephant, its body is big 
and round, so we can see it easily."[4]
10. All these different opinions were because each of the twelve men happened to touch a 
different place, so twelve different opinions resulted.

[1] The story-teller neglects to mention that all 12 people were blind [substitute m___-cú-pa_ 
for ch_], as in all versions of this world-famous fable of Indian origin.
[2] Where did this scribal element come into the story from?
[3] Like a giant pestle?
[4] This rather lame comment of person #4 indicates that the story-teller couldn't come up with 
another elephantine body part for the moment.
