32 How Woman Got her Clitoris and The Lawsuit between the Animals and the Human 
Beings

(Cà-bo)

1. This is a story about how God, once upon a time, after He had created Heaven and Earth, gave 
out gifts [to all his creatures].
2. Once upon a time, after God had finished creating Heaven and Earth, {He/God} provided all the 
things needed by all the people and creatures[1] {on earth/in the world}, whether it was all the 
{human beings/people} or all the kinds of animals, God created everything for them.
3. After he finished creating [all this], God spoke thus: "Come take them, everybody's things! [2]  
Whatever it is [you] need."
4. When he said this, all kinds of animals came.
5. The creatures who [would] bear horns took away [their] horns, and the creatures who [would] 
bear fur took away [their] fur.
6. Having done all this, after each creature [3] had carried everything off, for the second time God 
gave them [things] again.
7. And so, when he said, "Take it!" they [all] came.
8. A certain woman came, and this is what she said:
9. "I've heard that You have made something called 'a penis'."
10. Then, at that point, when [God] said, "OK, come take a penis that I've made," this woman 
suddenly ran up, and she grabbed a big horse penis that was there.
11. A penis that [God] had made. [4]
12. When [God] said, "This one is not yours! This is for the horse!" he picked it up [hurled/threw 
it] onto the ground and stamped on it, so that's why [pubic] hair is all tangled and bushy.
13. That's how the old story goes. [5]
14. A second thing—"We women are still not quite complete," they said.
15. "Our bodies are still not quite complete.
16. "Please add something," [they] once again went to beg [of God].
17. Well, [the God] cut off the tiny little glans [6] of a dog there, and threw it so it stuck onto the 
woman. [7]
18. Because of this, women have {clitorises/clitorides}, it is said.
19. An old Lahu story tells it this way.
***
20. Now a second matter, the story about how the animals and the human beings {went to court/ 
had a lawsuit} with each other.
21. One day it happened this way.
22. The people/humans and the animals took each other to court.
23. These animals went to God and said, "Oh, those so-called humans of yours, they're always 
shooting at us.
24. "They don't even {call/ invite/ summon} us [to make friends].
25. "They don't treat us [well] in any way at all.
26. "All they do is shoot at us," they said.
27. "You please teach them properly, those humans."
28. So God asked the animals, he asked a certain barking-deer, [8] "Haven't they invited you?" he 
said.
29. When God asked him this, he said, "As for inviting, they do invite us.
30. "[But] when they invite us, they just strike out at us!
31. "We don't have time to do anything [to escape them]."

Footnotes:

[1] __-c__ can mean either 'thing' or, in this context, 'creature'.
[2] Or "Come everybody, take your things!"
[3] The story-teller uses g_â 'All for humans', here extended to all God's creatures.
[4] Intending it for a horse.
[5] ch_-m__-kh__ 'traditional saying/story'
[6] ni_ ó-qo_, lit. "penis-head."
[7] Not clear whether the whole group of women was so provided. Probably meant to apply to the 
first woman created.
[8] Cervulus muntjac, known as the best eating in the jungle, now all but wiped out in Thailand.
