37 Song of Reconciliation of the Brother and Sister

1. {Long, long ago/ once upon a time} in Lahu country, in the land of Meh [1], there lived an 
older brother [2] and a younger sister [3], who used to divide up portions of game to eat.
2. I'd just like to tell a little story about how they didn't get along with each other.
3. One day [4] the younger sister caught a great sambhar deer and brought it [5], which she 
properly shared out with her brother.
4. Afterwards, the elder brother caught a porcupine [6] and brought it.
5. But then he didn't share it with his sister.
6. So the sister was very {hurt/resentful/offended}, and she went off downstream.
7. The brother went climbing off upstream.
8. One day they met each other again, and were so happy that they sang this little song:
9. <sister> Only long ago could we live together
	      Is that not so, oh, my brother!
10. <brother> It is so, oh, my sister!
11. <narrator> Indeed so! They hadn't seen each other for ages! [7]
—————————————————————————————————————
[1] mû-m__-mì-m__: mû-mì 'country'. This is the traditional former abode of the Lahu, in 
Yunnan, called m__ probably because the Chinese Lahu were said to use animals to plow their 
swiddens (m__ 'to plow'); in Thailand mountain fields (swiddens) are always cultivated by 
hand, unlike lowland wet-rice fields, where oxen and buffalo are used.
[2] __-u-phâ: an archaic kin term with a variety of related meanings: (1) older brother of a girl; (2) a 
girl's mother's brother; (3) wife's brother; (4) man's brother in law.  The basic meaning is 
'guardian of a young girl'.
[3]  __-nù-ma: Correlative of __-u-phâ. Archaic kin term meaning (1) sibling's daughter; niece; (2) 
female word of an elder brother or maternal uncle.
[4] a-l__ tê ni: lit. 'on the first day'.
[5] kh__-y__: Cervus unicolor.
[6] fâ_-pu: Asiatic porcupine [Hystrix brachyura]
[7] Lit., "only long ago had they seen each other."
