The Trickster and the Village Women

I

	(1) Once upon a time the Lahu were fighting a war with the Chinese.1 (2) Well, on a certain 
morning, the morning for going off to war, people were selected2 and they went off. (3) [But] while 
others had made rice-packets3 for themselves, this fellow __-qh__4 had wrapped up a sparse-feathered 
little chicken5 to take with him, and on the road, when they ate, when it was time to eat, he unwrapped 
it and made as if to eat his meal. (4) As he unwrapped it and the little chick hopped right out, he said, 
_h, dear, I mustn_ go [with you]! You all go [on ahead without me]! As for me, since I_e seen this 
omen,6 I'm going home. I can't possibly fight a war now. See you guys later!"7 (5) And so the others 
let him go back. 

II

	(6) Then, when they had let him go back, he ripped open a bumblebee's nest,  scooped out 
some crabs,  and tied them so they dangled from a bamboo-sheath,  placed this [all] outside the house 
[of a certain woman]. (7) Then when night fell,  and [the bees went] bzz-bzz-bzz and [the crab] went 
scratching teh-teh against the bamboo-tube_er, bamboo-sheath,  Trickster said to the woman, "Aha, 
the spirits of your husbands  have come back to you! Don't stay here any more! It's too scary!"
	(8) So they all went trooping over to the Trickster's house to sleep.

III

	(9) Then that  Trickster said, "Oh, come now, don't sleep at my house. Your kids will shit all 
over everything." (10) So then they swore to him, saying, "Oh, no, we won't let them shit. We 
guarantee  it!," and they were allowed to sleep at Trickster's house. (11) Then, after the bunch of 
women fell asleep, the Trickster thoroughly mashed up some shitbeans,  squeezed [the paste] into 
balls,  and smeared it on the rear ends of all the children who were there.
	(12) When dan broke he said, "Just look at the way your kids have crapped up my whole 
house!  What will you give me as compensation?,"  and they said, "Oh, any compensation at all! 
Whatever you want to take, take!," but when they offered him money he wouldn't take it. (13) No 
matter what they offered, he wouldn't take it.
	
IV-a
	(14) Then the Trickster said to the bunch of women, "Well, go and beat on the Hollow A-yaw 
Tree,  and listen [to what it tells you]."  (15) In order to go beat on that Hollow A-yaw Tree-oracle, 
he made the women take the long way around.  (16) The Trickster himself  went by the straight road, 
and got inside of the Hollow A-yaw, and the women tried beating on the outside, going thump-thump,  
saying, "What sort of compensation shall we give to Trickster?" (17) And the Trickster said,  "Ah, 
give him compensation, give him compensation!" (18) So they went back home again. (19) The 
Trickster also ran back after the women as fast as he could, [so he was] sitting in his house [when they 
got there], and said, "Well, what did it say to you?," and they said, "Well, all it said was, 'Give 
compensation to Trickster!'"

IV-b
	(20) "Well, then," he said, "unless you beat on it once more, you won't know [what to do]," so 
again they [went to] beat on it and ask it [a question] _the Trickster had quickly gotten inside of it 
again_and the women in a body  beat on it, thump-thump, and it said, "Oh, give him cunt, give him 
cunt!" 
	(21) At this the bunch of women ran back home, and the Trickster also rand back fast, and 
sitting in his house working this time  with strips of rattan he said, "Well, what did it say? What did it 
tell you?" and they said, "Well, Trickster_it just said, 'Give him cunt, give him cunt!'"
	(22) Whereupon Trickster proceeded to fuck  every single woman in the village, one after the 
other. 

V
	(23) Well, when all their husbands came back [from the war], they said, "Oh, Trickster did this 
and that to us! After you all were gone, Trickster fucked us!," so straightaway, as soon as all the 
husbands were back, they chased after Trickster trying to kill him, and he ran away. (24) He ran away 
and they chased him,  but they couldn't catch him. (25) No matter how they chased him they couldn't 
catch him. (26) Unsuccessful once again,  they came back home, while this Trickster, this guy,  he 
scooped out some honey  and smeared himself with it,  and then  he went and lay down inside  a 
storage basket  in a cotton-house,  then when they saw him in the joss-stick temple  they said, "Oh, 
the god has appeared to us today!"  (27) So they made offerings to him.  (28) When they gave him 
the food he ate it. (29) When he did this,  they thought "It's only the Trickster!," realizing  it all of a 
sudden, so they grabbed him and tried to beat him to death, but  again he ran away.

VI

	(30) Again they chased him, and oh, this time they were chasing and chasing him, he pulled out 
his penis and skinned back his foreskin,  and scratched together some leaves to cover himself, and 
made his penis all stiff and straight,  and they said, "Well, Trickster's trail has petered out now!  
And here's a red Phalloides mushroom  that has sprouted." (31) After this they went home.

VII
	(32) After they went home, the Trickster went back again too, and this time when they were 
chasing him, this guy, this Trickster,  he managed to climb up into a big clump of trees.  (33) When 
he had gotten to the top of a big tree,  at that point,  as they chopped away at it, trying to get it to fall 
into the river down below, he said, "Oh, in my position,  if you would only chop so that I fall into the 
water down there, I'd be able to swim back out and I wouldn't die.  [But] if you chop me  so I land 
on that rocky cliff up there, I'd surely be smashed to smithereens!  I would die!," and so they chopped 
it in such a way that its fall was broken by the cliff up there,  and he managed to escape into  a cave 
in the rocks.

VIII

	(34) Then, when the Trickster had gone into the cave up there, the others blew smoke  inside 
with all their might.  (35) But try as they would,  they couldn't get it to blow inside.  (36) He had 
taken off his shirt and was fanning it out again _from where he was, inside there.  [(37) After this, 
they made a falling-log trap for him to get caught in. ]  (38) They poked in sticks _they hacked off 
some sticks and poked them inside. (39) So the Trickster took a shit and smeared it on the sticks, and it 
sta-a-nk  like hell, and they said, "Aha, the Trickster's shit is coming out of him now!  He's dead!," 
and they set a falling-log trap  and went back home.

IX
	(40) After this, the Trickster took up his jewsharp_his jawharp , and blew on it with gusto,  
and early the next morning two young girls  came to have a look,  and when they heard the sound of 
the Trickster playing the jawharp, they said, "Yoo-hoo,  Trickster, please let the two of us come in!"  
(41) Then he said, "Well, then, let the one who is truly uglier come in first," and when the one who was 
truly uglier came in first, she was crushed to death.  (42) Thereupon the Trickster managed to escape 
outside once more. 

X
	(43) Then, again they chased and chased him, and [this time] they caught him.  (44) When 
they caught him they tied him to the ass of a water-buffalo, and dragged them along.  (45) Then they 
bent his face over downwards and dragged him over a piece of rocky ground, and he said "A-lo, a-lo, 
a-lo!"  (46) Then they dragged him over some grassy ground_uh, they drove him and dragged him 
along over some grassy ground,  and he said "A-lo, a-lo, a-lo!" (47) And when they dragged him 
[again] over the rocks they said, "Serves you right, serves you right, serves you right!"  (48) [But] he 
didn't die.

XI
	(49) Again he managed to get out, and once more they chased after him. (50) Once they had 
seized hold of him, they tied him so he hung underneath a big bridge over the water, some distance 
away.  (51) After they had left him strung up there, at that point,  a large group of traders  came 
along. (52) And they said, "Hey, Trickster!  What are you doing there under the bridge?,"  and he 
said_to that bunch of Chinese _"Since my eyes are sore, my eyes are 'imbibing the essence!'"  (53) 
"Well, we would like to imbibe it also, Trickster!" they said, and he said, "Let me loose then!" (54) So 
they let him loose, and he got free. 

	(55) So the Trickster _now that a group of traders had been driving their mules, horses, and 
elephants around to the villages, having come to trade them. (56) Since they all happened to have sore 
eyes,  he tied them up, and as they were trying to "imbibe the essence of the water" under there, under 
the bridge, he cut them down so they fell in and died, and Trickster got away with all their goods, their 
silver and their gold.

	(57) After this he went back, and when he had returned to his home again the said, "Oh, 
Trickster, how did you get [all this]? How did it happen that you got so much silver and gold even 
though we tried to kill you?," and he said, "Well, I just got it by 'imbibing the essence' of the water!  
Since it was you all who did this for me..." 

	(58) Then they said, "Oh, we'd like to get it too!," so he led them away, making each man carry 
with him to that place a pickling-tub  as big as a forehead-basket,  and he strung them up there 
underneath [the bridge], and after the people had gotten inside [their tubs] they entered the water.  (59) 
Immediately he made them sink down into the water, and they thrashed around furiously. 

	(60) Then, since there was one old codger who hadn't gone in, he said to him, "There, there, 
there, look! The others are fighting with each other over the gold!," so he jumped in too, and [Trickster] 
cut through [the ropes], and after the whole villageful [of men] had died, he got the women of all the 
people in the village for himself.
1This story, although recorded in Northern Thailand in 1965, dates from the faraway time when the ancestors of these 
Thailand Lahu were living in close contact with the Chinese. The Chinese by no means always came ahead in conflicts 
with the once fierce Loloish Tribes of Yunnan, and it was common for some Lolo groups to keep Chinese war-prisoners 
as slaves. See Lin Yueh-huan, The Lolo of Liang-Shan, HRAF Press (1961). Most of the Lahu people still live in China.
2The Lahu now in Thailand are all quite recent immigrants from Shan State in Burma, where they have been living for 
centuries as they slowly filtered southward from their ancestral homeland on the Yunnan-Tibet border. It is likely that it 
was the Shans who did the conscripting of recruits for military service in skirmishes against the Chinese. There are still 
many more Lahu living in Shan State than in Thailand. (The Shan are a Tai people.)
3The usual wayfarer's food is a cake of steamed rice wrapped in a banana leaf.
4This is the Trickster's proper name. (It is sometimes pronounced more like __-qha_i or __-qhan.) This name is clearly 
non-Lahu in origin, though its etymology is obscure. __- is a common prefix to Shan mens' names. Henceforth we 
translate __-qh__ as 'Trickster.'
5g_â_-qú-ni is "a kind of tailless chicken without breast feathers," literally "naked chicken" (__-qú-ni 'something naked'). It 
is possible that there is some pun intended here with ni_ 'penis,' though the ni (~ni_) of __-qú-ni really means 'red' [see 
note 52].
6According to traditional Lahu belief, anything unusual or scary that happens on a journey (e.g. seeing a dead body) is taken 
as an evil omen, and as a persuasive reason to go back home.
7The expression q___ e _a_, literally "I shall go back," is a common Lahu formula for leavetakings.
 On the tape Sentence 5 appears right after You all go. This was felt to be a clumsy ordering both by the story-teller himself 
and by other Lahu who listened to the tape, a feeling which is reinforced by the fact that the first clause of the first 
sentence in Section II recapitulates Sentence 5 in the normal "chaining" way.
 p___g_u_-li 'bumblebees' live in holes in rotting trees, one insect per hole. It is not specified how many bees the Trickster 
took. He also must have put the bee(s) in some kind of container, though the narrator does not bother to say this.
 From a body of water nearby. Again the narrator does not say how many crabs were fished out.
 va__l__-q___ 'a crinkly covering adhering to the surface of young bamboo plants.' The Trickster selected this material for the 
noise it would make when scratched.
 mu_ ph___ ve, lit. "the sky is revealed," is the Lahu idiom for night falling. The idea seems to be that only at night is the sky 
revealed for what it really is, a black star-studded expanse.  ph___ is the same verb as 'unwrap' [Section 1].
 Bees go v__-v__-v__ in Lahu, while crabs go t___-t___ when they scratch.
 The narrator momentarily misspoke himself, saying first va__d__-qo_ 'tube of bamboo' instead of va__l__-qo__.
 The Trickster is now talking to all the jittery women of the village, who have evidently all come running out of their houses. 
He uses the expression n__-h_ __-pa_ 'your (pl.) husbands.' __-pa_, lit. 'a male,' is a slightly vulgar or insulting term for 
'husband,' since the mot juste is __-ph__.
 __-qh__ o_-ve, lit. "that Trickster." The demonstrative o_-ve functions as an anaphoric marker in this narrative: 'the Trickster 
we have been talking about, the Trickster already mentioned.' To avoid heaviness in the English, this is usually simply 
translated with the definite article, 'the Trickster' [as in Sentence 11]. For the anaphoric use if chi 'this,' see Note 25.
 The women use the rather high-flown loanword la__-l_ 'guarantee' (cf. Thai rábr___), which adds to the comic effect.
 n___-qh__, lit. "shit-beans," are fermented soybeans made into paste or cakes and often eaten fried with vegetables and 
ginger. The name arises from its dark brown color, its consistency, and its pungent odor. This is also called n___-k__, lit. 
"rotten-beans," which is the literal meaning of its Burmese name pe_-pou_ (written Burmese pâi-pup).
 ch___ 'to crumple up, make into a ball.'
 qh__ o_ k_, lit. "shit into." The verb k_ 'insert' is sometimes used as an auxiliary verb to indicate thorough, penetrating 
action. The phrase 'my whole house' is an attempt to render this idea in English.
 _a_y (or ___) 'pay compensation' is another legalistic loanword from Tai (cf. Siamese ca_aj 'pay').
 a-y__qo_ 'hollow (qo_) a-yaw tree.' The a-y_ (either Lagerstroemia cylindrica or L. macrocarpa) is one of the four 'master 
trees' (_____j__-m__) of Lahu tradition. It is a very tall, straight tree, believed especially apt to be hit by lightning.
 The whole complex verbal idea, 'beat on and listen to what it says' is conveyed by the concise two-verb concatenation d___ 
na 'beat' + 'listen.' It could equally well be translated 'beat on and ask it [a question],' since the verb na, like Japanese 
kiku, can mean either 'ask' or 'listen to,' according to context. (When it means 'ask' it usually appears in the compound 
na-ni.) Instead of repeating 'listen' in the translation of Sentence 15, the phrase is rendered there as 'beat on … oracle.'
 ya__-q_ q___ k__, lit. "a place where the road curves."
 __-qh__ chi, lit. "this Trickster," here translated 'the Trickster himself' for contrast with the women. The determiner chi 
'this' and the demonstrative o_-ve 'that' (see Note 16) are sometimes interchangeable as anaphoric markers, and are 
usually both translated simply as 'the.' (The narrator tends to alternated them for variety. He used o_-ve in Sentences 14 
and 17, but chi in Sentences 16 and 19.)
 qo_-qo_ or qo__-qo__.
 No doubt in a disguised "oracular" voice, though the story-teller made no effort to reproduce this in his narration.
 Or 'beat on it and listen [to what it said].' See Note 23.
 te_ mo_ te l_, lit. "making a group."
 cha 'cunt, vagina, female pudenda.' The Lahu language has no euphemisms for human sexual organs or excretory 
functions. cha (or cha-p___), like ni_ or ni_-qh___ 'cock, penis, male genitalia,' is plain-spoken, neither medical, 
circumlocutory, nor vulgar.
 'This time' renders the Lahu auxiliary verb q___ 'do again, do in turn, do as another in a series of actions.'
 pa__ 'copulate, have intercourse with, fuck.' See Note 30.
 ya_-mi__ma te_ qha__-qha__ ve: the meaning 'every one in the village' is conveyed by the reduplication of qha__ 'village.' The 
idea 'one after the other' is provided by the auxiliary verb ph___ 'perform an action as one of a group; perform several 
similar actions.' As a main verb, ph___ means 'to pile up, make a heap.'
 The prolongation of the action is conveyed in the original by an exaggerated drawling intonation on the 
clause-concatenating particle l_.
 te_ po__ ma_ g_a ta_ l_: lit. "once again not having gotten him."
 The story-teller uses a succession of two topic noun-phrases in apposition, both to establish sufficient contrast with the 
ineffectual actions of the husbands, and to give himself a bit of breathing space before launching into the rapid series of 
clauses which is to follow in the same sentence.
 Presumably from a nearby honey-tree. The economy of detail the story-teller permits himself is possible because his whole 
audience (except the poor recording linguist) had already heard the story many times before.
 All these English words are necessary to translate the three-verb concatenation, g___ 'perform vigorous action' + kha__ 
'scoop' + h_ 'dye': p__-g___ g__ kha__ ho l_, lit. "honey-VIG.ACT.-scoop-daub-MORE TO FOLLOW."
 Instead of 'and then,' the phrase qhe te _e_ l_ __ could be translated 'having done this.' The presence of the verb-particle _e_ 
'prerequisite action' makes this expression 'verbier' than the lexicalized concatenative conjunction qhe-te-l_ which 
occurs so often in the text. See Linguistic Analysis, Section D.
 th_-qo_ qh_ __ lo__ y___ ta_ l_: lit. "storage basket + interior + LOCATIVE + enter + lie down + DURATIVE + 
MORE-TO-FOLLOW."
 th_-qo_ or ph_-qo_ 'a huge basket, often taller than a man and several feet in diameter, used for storing paddy or other 
harvested crops.'
 _a_-la__y__ 'an outbuilding where cotton was stored.' The cotton sticking to the honey gave the Trickster a sort of 
tarred-and-feathered appearance, so that he looked like something 'out of this world.'
 _a-tu__k___y__ (or _a-tu__k__ or _a-tu_=y__): lit. "incense-burn-place-house," a building where there was an alter for burning 
incense-sticks. Lahu 'animists' burn incense and candles to honor the supreme supernatural g___-_a [see Note 44, and the 
works for anthropologist A.R. Walker], the last syllable of whose name seems to be related to the morpheme _a 
'joss-stick, incense-stick.' The Pidgin English word joss, meaning 'idol, cult-image,' itself derives ultimately from 
Portuguese deos 'god.'
 g___-_a, here translated as 'the god,' is the Great Spirit of Lahu animist religion, conceived of as an incorporeal and abstract 
being far above the nature spirits (e.g. Mountain-Spirit, Water-Spirit, Rainbow-Spirit, etc.), who are rather stupid and 
often malevolent.  g___-_a has his own priests, who enjoy higher status in the community than the 'spirit-doctors' who 
deal with the ne_ or nature-spirits.
 tân-tù tân pî ve: Lahu has a cognate-object construction here which would be too heavy in literal English translation ("they 
offered him offerings"). tân is a loanword from Shan, which in turn borrowed the word from Burmese.
 A real god is supposed to inhale merely the 'breath' or essence (_á, __-_a_) of a food-offering, so Trickster is revealed as a 
non-divine being. This incident is reversed symbolically at the end of the story, where Trickster claims to have made his 
fortune by 'inhaling the air' or 'imbibing the essence'_thus indirectly proclaiming himself to be a god.
 _i_ la l_: lit. "coming to know," i.e. 'realizing.' The verb-particle la 'enter a state' is related to the full verb là 'come.'
 'But' here translates the concatenative particle l_ 'MORE-TO-FOLLOW,' which serves to indicate that the preceding 
clause is not the last in the sentence. It is usually translated 'and,' though occasionally we render it by a different 
conjunction (so, but, etc.) or by a participial construction. Any number of l_ may occur in a Lahu sentence or narrative 
without the hearer experiencing a feeling of repetitiveness. The same is not true of English and, which gives a tedious, 
babyish quality to a narrative if used between every clause. [See Linguistic Analysis, Section E.]
 ni_ q__ ve 'retract the foreskin.' q__ means 'to extract through a narrow opening.' (It is also used, e.g. for removing mucus 
from the nose.)
 So that only his glans protruded through the covering of leaves. (It is to be noted that our word glans itself is a 
metaphorical extension of a plant-name, 'acorn.')
 The reader will perhaps forgive this pun. The literal meaning of this sentence is "There is no longer any way to chase after 
Trickster's trail."
 mu__ni_-g__ or mu__ni_-g_w_ 'a kind of tasty ground mushroom with a red cap (white underneath) that resembles a glans 
penis.' The second syllable ni_ means 'red,' but recalls the homophonous (except for tone) syllable ni_ 'penis.' mu_ means 
'mushroom' and g__ means 'round.' 'Red phalloides' is a feeble attempt to render this phytonym in English.
 The story-teller uses a double topic NP to give himself a second to think See Note 36.
 ____-c__ __-pu_lo_: the narrator amends this to ____-c___lo_ 'a big tree,' when this clause is "chain-repeated" in the next 
sentence.
 ta__ ga_-e or ta__ ge__-e, lit. "climb" + "arrive," i.e. 'get to the top of, climb to the top.' In the Lahu, this clause is an almost 
verbatin "chain-repetition" of the last clause of the previous sentence, but an exact repetition would be tedious in 
English: '…he got to the top of a big clump of trees. When he got to the top of a big tree…' This is another example of 
the truism that one language's cohesive devices may be too 'gummy' for another language. See Note 48.
 This translates the Lahu filler qhe te l_ __.
 This renders _a_ l__, lit. "as for me," a strongly topicalized first person pronoun. See Note 59.
 This sentence is translated with conditional auxiliaries, because it sounds somewhat better than the more literal: "If you 
chop and I fall into the water down there, I'll be able to swim back out and won't die." The only marker of 
conditionality in the Lahu is the particle qo 'if; when' at the end of the first clause.
 The verb thu 'chop down' is here construed with a personal direct object, though it is much more usual to have 'tree' as its 
object. This is preserved in the translation, and in fact reinforces the symbolic psychosexual meaning of the 
choppign_i.e. an attempt at castration of the potent by the impotent.
 n___-ka__ qay ve 'go smash, get smashed to smithereens.' n___-ka__ is one of a class of morphemes that forms vivid 
adverbial expressions with the verb qay 'go,' much like English 'go kaputt,' 'go blooey,' etc. The 'surely' in the 
translation is motivated by the strongly topicalized _a_ l__, which appears in this sentence too [see Note 57].
 __ pi_: lit. "lean against" + "give," i.e. 'cause to lean against, cause to be propped up on.'
 'Managed to escape into' is conveyed by a string of three Lahu verbs: ph_ 'flee' + lo__ 'enter' + gà-e 'arrive at [one's 
goal].' The latter morpheme has developed an assimilated fusional variant (ge__-e) with a more abstract meaning, 
'vigorous execution of an action.' See Note 55.
 a_-mi_ 'fire.' The Lahu says 'blew fire inside,' though this must be translated as 'smoke' for clarity in English. Burning 
brush at the mouth of a cave is a common method for smoking animals out, or of asphyxiating them so they can be 
removed after they die.
 g___ m___ k_ is a three-verb concatenation meaning literally "drag-blow-insert." g___ 'drag' here functions simply to make the 
verbal action more vivid, and is rendered as 'with all their might.'
 qhà-qhe te ka__: lit. "whatever they did."
 m___ k_ ma_ ga_: lit. "blow-insert-not-reach." gà 'reach, arrive' is a 'potential complement,' here negated by mâ, that 
expresses the non-successful outcome of the verbal action m___ k_ 'blow into.'
 This sequence of actions is expressed by a concise sequence of three Lahu verbs, q___ ph__ t___: 'take off' (this is preceded 
by its object a_-po__ 'shirt') + 'fan' + emerge, do outwards.'
 This last clause is stuck onto the end of the sentence as an afterthought, and is marked as such by the concatenative 
particle l_ at the end, which normally occurs only in non-final position.
 va-t__ te k_: lit. "falling-log trap + make + insert." Since the trap was set up outside of the cave, k_ does not have its literal 
meaning 'insert' here, but its more abstract meaning of 'in such a way that the verbal action penetrates its goal.' See 
Note 20.
 This whole sentence was uttered prematurely by the narrator, who had forgotten momentarily to recount the episode of the 
sticks. He supplies the falling-log trap incident in its proper place below, at the end of Sentence 39.
 Slightly rattled by his error, the story-teller makes a false start in this sentence also, uttering the clause about poking the 
sticks before the one about hacking them off the trees they come from. He immediately corrects himself. (This story was 
told at high speed, in 6 minutes and 20 seconds, and it is not surprising that the narrator made a mistake or two. In 
general it is told extremely well, with great economy of detail, so that the pace never flags.)
 The verb nù 'stink' is pronounced with exaggerated drawled intonation. See Note 34.
 __-qh__ chi qh__ t___ __ l_: qh__ t___ 'shit emerges.' The tape is not perfectly clear at this point, and it is possible that it should 
be transcribed qh__ te_ 'shit is crushed (out).'
 va-t__ 'falling-log trap': a complicated and delicately-contrived kind of trap, which the animal springs by stepping on a 
board which instantaneously activates a series of rods, the last of which releases a heavy log. The husbands, although 
they believe Trickster to be dead, leave this trap at the mouth of the cave as a precautionary measure.
 á-thâ 'jewsharp': a pair of supple bamboo strips with thin reeds and notes a fourth apart, which the player blows on while 
flicking the ends up and down. The two notes are alternated and iterated with considerable rhythmic complexity, and the 
instrument is used mostly in courtship. The story-teller corrects the simple word á-thâ to the more formal compound 
word á-thâ-á-y__ (here rendered by the euphemism 'jawharp'). Technically, á-y__ refers to a slightly different kind of 
instrument with strips tuned an octave apart. á-thâ-á-y__  sometimes means 'jewsharps of both kinds,' but here it is 
simply a more sonorous synonym of á-thâ.
 'With gusto' translates the emphatic particle qha, as well as the drawled intonation on the following concatenative particle 
l_.
 ya_-mi__ha_ 'girl of marriageable age, nubile young woman.; The Trickster had so far confined his relationships to married 
women.
 ca ni g__ 'come to look for the fun of it.' It is not entirely clear whether the girls came simply out of idle curiosity to view 
Trickster's 'remains' (before having heard the music), or because they were entranced by the music. The latter 
interpretation seems more likely.
 'Yoo-hoo' was chosen to render the Lahu vocative particle ò, since its 'Blondie-and-Dagwood' quality suggests the 
empty-headedness the girls display.
 The girls had evidently learned of Trickster's amatory prowess from their mothers and were eager to see for themselves.
 It is hard to understand the girls' docile stupidity here. From our point of view it should have been more effective for the 
Trickster to have said, "Let the prettier one of you come in first." Then presumably they would have vied for the honor 
of being first. One can only conclude that the girls were so much under Trickster's spell that they obeyed him literally, 
making an objective assessment of who was uglier.
 The verbal idea is expressed by a string of four verbs: q___ 'return, do again' + ph_ 'flee' + t___ 'emerge' + gà-e 'manage to 
do successfully' or (or ge__-e). See Note 62.
 The verb-particle _e_ is used after the verb g_a__-mi 'catch by chasing,' in order to convey a nuance of regret. (The narrator 
here takes Trickster's point of view.)
 g___-__, lit. "drag-lead." Here g___ is used in its literal sense of 'drag,' and not merely as an enlivener of the verbal idea [see 
Note 64]. It is immaterial whether we take the object to be the buffalo or the Trickster, since they are tied together. (No 
object is expressed in the Lahu.)
 a_lo_o (or àlòo, or alôo) is an interjection expressing pain, grief, surprise, etc.
 The narrator retracts his original clause by means of the "self-correcting" interjection èe, here translated as 'uh.'
 The interjection qa_-ca__ is used to gloat at somebody's discomfiture. The story-teller emphasizes Trickster's plight so that 
the audience can fully enjoy it. He won't be kept down for long. This episode, among its other functions in the story, 
serves to put Trickster's ultimate complete triumph into higher relief.
 'Some distance away' translates the spatial demonstrative pronoun ô 'over there,' here pronounced with exaggerated 
intonation to indicate greater distance.
 This renders the connective filler qhe te _e_ l_.
 As we soon find out, these were Chinese traveling merchants. This provides an interesting symmetry with the beginning of 
the story, where the men are going off to fight the Chinese. Evidently the confrontation with the Chinese operated at 
many levels in ancestral Lahuland.
 Note that the traders recognize the Trickster without ever having been introduced to him. Trickster is larger than life and 
known to everybody. He shares this universal recognizability with Wakdjunkaga, the Trickster figure of the Winnebago 
Indians [Radin 2956/1973].
 This could equally well be translated 'Why are you under the bridge?', since the usual Lahu way of saying 'why' means 
literally "doing what?" (a_-tho__-ma te [l_]).
 The phrase 'to that bunch of Chinese' is inserted as an afterthought at the end of the Lahu sentence.
 _a_ m__ ve, here translated 'imbibing the essence,' is an expression of key symbolic importance in this story. It does not 
occur in ordinary speech, and is clearly meant to be pregnant with meaning. _a_ means 'air, breeze, vapor; breath; vital 
force, spirit, energy, incorporeal essence.' The verb m__ means 'to pass air noisily through the mouth or nose,' as in the 
following expressions: ___-m__ ve 'hiccup,' ___-m__ ve 'belch,' qa-m__ ve 'sing,' ti_-_i__ m__ ve 'whistle,' ha_-m__ ve 'yawn,' 
ha_-thi_ m__ ve 'sneeze.' See Section XII.
 The verb-particle _e_ 'regret' (homophonous with another particle of aspectual meaning, something like 'prerequisite 
action') is used in this clause, as if the narrator were sorry that Trickster got loose. He is here taking the opposite attitude 
to the one mentioned above [Note 83]. It should be noted that it is often difficult to tell the two _e_ particles apart in 
connected narrative. [See Linguistic Analysis, Section E.]
 The narrator, who had started to say what the Trickster did next, backtracks in order to give us some more background 
information on the traders.
 Due to the long dusty roads they had to travel. Trickster had alertly noticed that their eyes were red.
 WIth this remark the Trickster is indirectly revealing himself to be a god, for only gods can live off the incorporeal 
essence of things. This is a symbolic inversion of the incident in Section V, where he was found out not to be a god 
when he ate the substance of the food-offerings in the temple. See Note 46.
 n__-h_ te a_ la_ l_: the particle la_ indicates action that benefits a non-third person (in this case 2nd person benefitting 1st 
person). Trickster is pretending to be grateful to the men for having strung him up under the bridge.
 i_-mu__qo_: 'a large-mouthed vessel made of earth, sand, and cement, used for pickling.'
 qhá-ju_-lu: 'a deep loosely-woven basket used for transporting water-gourds, carried by a strap around the forehead so that 
the hands are left free.'
 Instead of the rather flat clause 'they entered the water,' my chief informant (1965-6) suggested the emendation:
	a-y__-y__ ph__ l_, co_ i_-ka__ qh_ __ lo__ e c_ ve ce_
'he slowly (a-y__-y_) released (ph__) [the ropes] and made (c_) them enter the water.'
 'Furiously' translates the emphatic verb-particle a-lâ (sometimes pronounced qha-lâ).
