60 The Six Stupid Men and the Gophers

1. Once upon a time six stupid men went to dig up gophers [1].

2. Having dug for gophers, they caught seven of them.

3. So after they caught the seven animals, they [proceeded to] divide them up [among 
themselves] [2].

4. As they were dividing them up, one person sat amongst them and said, "Here, one for you; 
here, one for you; here, one for that guy; here, one for that other guy"—dividing them up like 
this, the six people got six of the animals, but one was left over.

5. So then, when they did it again like this, dividing them up again, still just one animal was left 
over.

6. When one of the guys [3] took the one that was left over, he had two of them.

7. So they divided it up again.

8. But even after they divided it again, [the last] guy got the two animals that were left.

9. So {all the livelong day/ the whole blessed day} [4] they kept on dividing up the gophers this 
way, until they were all quarreling with each other.

10. Since they were acting this way, they took a very long time doing it, when all of a sudden a 
hunter appeared.

11. When this hunter appeared, he said, "Hey stupids, what are you all doing?" When he asked 
them this, they said, "We're dividing up these gophers, but we can't agree about it, so we're 
quarreling {this way/ like this}."

12. So the hunter said, "Bring them to me, all the gophers!" and when he said this, they brought 
them {immediately} all to one place.

13. The hunter divided them up for them, saying, "Here, one for you; one for that guy; one for 
that other guy," and after he had divided up six of the animals among the six people, the hunter 
took the remaining one for himself.

14. So then those six fools said, "Now this is they way that a person who knows how to divide 
does it!" and they were very happy.

15. Ha, ha, ha!

Footnotes:

[1] fâ_ phî: 'gopher; bamboo rat' [Rhizomys sumatrensis]
[2] 'Among themselves' translates dà_ 'reciprocal action'.
[3] tê   g_â 		phâ is a slangy way of saying ch_ tê g_â
     one 	person (clf) 	fellow, guy
[4] tê ni tâ-vâ: tê ni 'all day' + tâ-vâ 'id.' < Tai (Si. thá_ wan).  The two equivalent expressions 
are juxtaposed for emphasis.
