64 Welcome to the Village (with a hymn)

[Medic who had received training in Mae Taeng]

1. At this time, we brethren [1] are very happy that a foreigner [2] and a Lahu [3] have become 
friends with us, and that we are seeing each other this evening.
2. However, amidst our great happiness—er—although we live in different places [4], being able 
to meet this evening is due to the great grace of God.
3. In addition, at this time we would like to record [5] a hymn.
4. I'll teach you this hymn that has been composed, just as it is in our prayer-books. [6]

The doors of God {are still/ stay} open
for all (us) sinners.
Therefore, O brethren
do not hesitate!
If time runs out
you won't have time to be happy.

The doors of God are still open.
Come in, come in!
Before Jesus' door closes.
If time runs out
you won't have time to be happy.

Speaker: That's how it ends.
—————————————————————————————————————
[1] __-ví-__-ni: lit. 'elder and younger siblings'; the most common vocative term used when 
addressing a group of Lahu.
[2] Kâlâ-phu: lit. 'white Indian'. Term is used for Euro-Americans, like Thai fàrà_. The reference 
is to the author. Afro-Americans are called Kâlâ-phu=nâ_, lit. 'black white Indian'.
[3] I.e., Cà-l__, my chief consultant on this first fieldtrip (1965-66), a recent immigrant to 
Thailand from Shan State, then living in Chiang Mai, not in a Lahu village.
[4] tê 	g_â 	tê    kà: lit. "one-person-one-place"
     one CLF 	one CLF
[5] te k_ gâ: k_ 'insert, put in' is used for 'to record'
[6] g___-_a ve t__-kh__: lit. "God's words"
