65 Visiting the Village's Fields

1. Headman: <clears throat> "This morning we're going to visit the fields, right? Are the two of 
you [1] going along? Cà-l__?
2. Cà-l__: We'll go!
3. H: OK. Well, you're going to take pictures of all the things connected with our cultivating our 
{swiddens/ mountain fields}, aren't you?
4. C: Yes, fine!
5. H: Let's go then, right now. You have {the/ enough} time to go, right?
6. C: Go! Say, on the road you're {going on/ taking} are there many Northern Thai [2] villages?
7. H: There are lots of them. As for Northern Thai, {there are plenty/ there's no shortage} [3] of 
them! There are one or two villages.
8. And a road for motor-cars {reaches/ goes} almost up to our fields over there.
9. Yeah, this village right here [4] is Northern Thai.
10. All of these many trees by the roadside here belong to the "Big Boss" [5].
11. And there ahead of us there's another Northern Thai village.
12. All these tea {orchards/ plantations} are also Northern Thai.
13. Not Central Thai folks…
14. Yeah, and we have to draw water [6]. Right here. To drink in the fields
15. C: Isn't there any water up there?
16. H: No, there isn't. We scoop up all the water here that we use everyplace in the fields…
17. Hey, how about rolling ourselves a {cigar/ smoke}, OK? One for each of us.
18. C: Yeah, that'd be great.
19. H: Oh, when you make a cigar to smoke {out of/ in} a banana leaf it's very harsh.
20. Here, when we make them in corn-husks, they smell great.
21. Here, you smoke one too!
22. Just grab those matches over there!
23. This cigar is hard to light [7]! It's a little too wet.
24. C: Whose tobacco is it?
25. H: It's the {Kachin's/ Jingpho's} [8] tobacco! Yep, it must not have been well dried, this 
tobacco. You can't light it…
26. Hey, these tea gardens here we Lahu pick to earn money…[9]
27. Over there what's hanging high up on a tree is a honeycomb.
28. Have you ever {tasted/ licked} the juice [10]?
29. C: We have tasted {the juice/ honey} before.
30. H: Did it taste very good?
31. C: Delicious!
32. H: There are twelve nests hanging there. Now, this year there {aren't that many/ are rather 
few} of them hanging.
33. The {path/ road} to where we {scoop up/ draw} water to drink is up a very steep slope.
34.When we carry the water we must go home bending our heads [forward to keep our balance].
35. This road here is the road that we usually {walk on/ take}.
36. So it's not far now until we {get to/ reach} the fields.
37. When we get/ reach up there onto the saddleback [11] in the mountains, we'll be able to see 
over there where the fields are.
38. Look over there! Those people tilling the fields, they're our Lahu folks [12].
39. <shouting to the workers> Till the fields well, till 'em well now!
40. We'll take a picture of your backs!
41. Field-worker: What are you looking for?
42. We're just visiting. Well, you're tilling the field. Don't exert yourselves so much!
43. If you don't have anything to eat and drink you'll have no strength.
44. Really tasty food—pork, chicken [13].
45. Prepare the food properly and then work.
46. You'll have the strength.
47. If you don't have {food/ curries} [14] to eat you'll have no strength—when you're working 
in the fields.
48. {If/ When} you should hook [your tool] onto a tree stump you could topple over backwards!
49. Cook delicious curries to eat [before working]. [15]
50. There's an awful lot of hard work [to do] around here.
51. If you guys drop dead, [your hard work] can't follow you [to the grave]. Take it easy!
…
52. H: Whew, the sun sure is hot!
53. And the dust stinks so bad you could die. [16]
54. Today our whole bodies will all get pitch-black with dirt. [17]
55. Wow, the sun is so hot!
56. Hey, guys, why don't we just go hunting for something to eat!
57. Say, would the two of you like to go?
58. Cà-l__: We'd love to!
59. H: Well, let's go see to the guns first. If there's one gun per person [18] we can go.
60. C: Hurry and look for them. Two of them.
61. H: There's a guy over there. I don't know whether or not he's going along.
62. C: If it's him, I hear he's never shot a gun in his life. [19]
63. H: Well, let's go see then. Cà-qa_, please go and ask your father. Your father's probably not 
going [hunting with us].
64. Cà-qa_: Oh, he actually left yesterday. All by himself he's lying in wait up there in the 
mountains, up on a rocky slope!
65. H: I guess he's gone then, {he also/ him too}.
66. So, let's take some pictures now.
67. Let's take a picture of all of us shooting guns, carrying guns on our shoulders, aiming our guns 
{at treetops/ high at the trees}.
68. Cà-l__: What kinds of guns are they?
69. H: They're flintlocks! [20] They're big muskets. [21]
70. Somebody: that'll be OK, I guess.
71. H: They're very fine. They're Pie-talian! [22] They're called Pie-talian.
72. Cà-l__: What does "Pie-talian" mean?
73. H: "Pie-talian" means _án-ph___ [23]—it's _án-ph___!
74. Cà-l__: Well, what does _án-ph___ mean then?
75. H: It means Pie-talian, I told you. _án-ph___.
76. Cà-g_â_: Where do they say that the Pietalian guns came from?
77. H: A long time ago they came from a white man's country.
78. Cà-g_â_: Which white man's country?
79. H: A white man's country down there in the west, in the southern part.
80. Cà-g_â_: A place where black people live?
81. H: White people, a white person's country. White people.
82. Cà-g_â_: I bet they're not white, they're probably black.
83. It's underneath the black man's country. <changing the subject>
84. Well, let's take some pictures, one person in each picture, carrying guns on our shoulders, on 
our backs [24]—all of us.
85. Oh boy, today the sun is so hot! We went hunting—we're exhausted.
86. Woman: You men go hunting, we women catch frogs.
87. I didn't get to shoot a single animal. Nobody drove any animals towards me.
88. Down below me where you were you should have followed the animals' trail properly. There 
were plenty [25] of barking-deer tracks.
89. You guys drove the animals away. [26] They went down from the mountain peak over there.
90. If you had only shouted and driven them over there towards me on the high ground above the 
river, I would have caught a barking-deer!
<unintelligible passage>
91. The barking-deer are still over there. Under the rocks.
92. Woman: Your wife and children are waiting for something to eat at home.
93. H: Oh, those damn barking-deer! They don't show themselves where people are.
94. Since you guys hunted that way for me, today we just went wandering around wasting time.
95. Very soon now we'll go hunting together properly in the jungle.
96. Woman: That's the way it is! We're not going to get anything to eat. [27] If we [women] go 
catch some frogs we'll have something to eat.
97. H: Well, there's an old proverb [about this]. You're wrong. "Think not that ye shall always 
fail, nor suppose that ye shall always succeed." Don't think you won't ever get anything to eat, 
whether you get anything or not [on any specific occasion].
98. Never get weary of {going/ making forays} into the jungle—think "I'll catch something to 
eat," and go look for it!
—————————————————————————————————————
[1] Cà-l__ and the author
[2] The Lahu make a clear distinction between K__l__ 'Northern Thai' and Thây 'Central Thai; 
Standard Thai; Siamese'.
[3] p__-l___ (N) 'plenty; abundance' < N. Thai
[4] kà_ kà_ is colloquial for chò kà_ 'here'
			        Nsd Pn
[5] _athê-(< Bs.) ló ( < Tai): a wealthy Thai who owned the plantations near Huey Tat, and 
sometimes hired Lahu to help pick the crop. See Text #69 "Picking Tea".
[6] í-kâ_ qho ve (OV): a very laborious process, filling up gourds or bamboos from a water 
source and schlepping them in tumpline baskets up the mountainside to the village or the fields.
[7] tú mâ tò_ 	p__:
kindle not burn be able
 tò_ 'burn'/tú 'kindle' are a simplex/causative verb pair, with the farmer often serving as the 
resultative complement of the latter. For the concept of resultative complement, see Y.R. Chao 
____ and GL ____.
[8] A Jingpho man was a long-term resident of Huey Tat (prob. came with them < Burmese), and 
was very well liked by the Lahu villagers.
[9] ph___ câ: 
     pick	   eat
câ 'eat' here functions as a versatile verb meaning 'V for a living'. The verb used for foods that 
are consumed for pleasure (e.g., honey, sugar-cane) rather than for mere sustenance, is often 
l___ 'lick', rather than câ 'eat'.
[10] __-g___ 'liquid', here used instead of p__-g___ 'honey' ("bee-juice")
[11] qa_-lè_: 'a relatively flat or low part of a mountain; saddleback; high plateau'.
[12] Lâhu_-yâ: lit. "Lahu sons; Lahu children." cf. Heb. B'nei Yisrael.
[13] H. is gently teasing them. Meat was something eaten only on special occasions, certainly not 
in the packets of food taken to the fields every day, or usually eaten in a field-hut. [Explain á-po-
qo DL 87.]
[14] __-chî: lit. "rice-lifter" (chî 'lift up'), that which is eaten with rice (cf. Thai kàpkhâaw), 
conventionally translatable as 'curry', or simply 'food'.
[15] 'Before working' conveyed by the Pv _e_ 'inchoative'
[16] __ e la yò: cf. the Thai intensifier c_ taaj.
[17] This sentence contains two words meaning 'all,' each with a slightly different sense. qha-p__-
è 'all [of a thing]; the whole thing' and dê-dê 'all (members of an aggregate)'.
[18] tê g_â tê qh__: g_â 'Clf for people', qh__ 'Clf for elongated objects, incl. guns'; tê 'one'.
[19] Lit. "I hear he's never shot—as for the thing called a gun."
[20] mà_-t___-nâ_: a muzzle-loading gun whose fuse must be lit manually, by hammer or 
match
       < Shan    gun
[21] l__-kà-tù: more or less synonymous with mà_-t___-nâ_.
[22] pítalêi_: evidently a garbled version of 'Italian'-cf. Thai _iitaalii.
[23] I have been unable to trace this word, which might well be a jocular invention of the 
headman.
[24] tâ_: 'carry on shoulder'; pû 'carry on the back'.
[25] cí-cí mâ hê_: a pleonastic expression, lit. "not just a little bit," i.e., 'plenty of'.
[26] I.e., instead of towards me.
[27] From the hunting of you men.
