67 A Day Hunting and Talking 
Legitimate Headman Cà-bí & Cà-g_â_
[Tape VI, Side 1]
1 H: Well, what shall we do with ourselves today, Jaga?
2 C-g_: Why, we can do whatever we please!1
3 H: Well then, let's go hunting, shall we?
4 C-g_: We'll go hunting!
5 H: Over there, above Keh-pa-tau2 valley, we'll climb up and hunt above the Pu-pui 
River, okay?
6 C-g_: I'd like to go, if that's where [we're going]. The squirrels--there are plenty of 
squirrels3 [there]. Lots of barking-deer [too].
7 H: If you catch a barking-deer, do you plan to sell the meat?
8 C-g_: Well, sure, of course I'll sell it.
9 H: How much per kilo would you sell it for?
10 C-g_: Oh, I probably wouldn't sell it for less than twelve baht a kilo.
11 H: Hm--if you did get a barking-deer, you'd get back your investment in buying the 
gun, wouldn't you? 
12 C-g_: Sure, I certainly would get it back. 
13 H: Let's hunt then, let's hunt! Why don't you go around [tracking]4 on that steep slope 
over there5 and force them [the animals] down into that grove of mi-sa bamboo. I'll go 
and wait down there.
14 g_: Okay, fine. I'll drive them down for you, all right! Hey, Blackie6! Hey! Hey! 
15 H: I haven't gotten there yet. Don't do it yet! Let me make my way down first.
16 g_: Be careful now. Wow! There sure are lots of (animal) tracks [up here]!
17 H: Okay, wind your way down--down now.
18 g_: Keep right on their trail [when they get down] there!
19 H: Drive 'em [down], drive 'em [down]!
20 g_: Hi, hi! Hi, Blackie, Blackie! Hey, something's moving7! …8
21 H: {Take it easy, take it easy / Be quiet, be quiet}, a barking-deer's coming down 
now.
22 g_: It's gone, it's gone.
[Noise made by the deer: Then the sound of the gun: ]
23 H: Hey, now it's gone into the river down there--into the river!
24 g_: What is it?
25 H: It's a big buck, I tell you, a buck.
26 g_: Gee, it'll taste great today--when we boil it up and eat it!
27 H: Oho, its hindquarters have sunk right into the river-bed7! Come on down, come on 
down! Come help me carry my gun. I can't lift him all by myself.
28 g_: Aw, you carry it [the gun] by yourself! I can't do it now. I'm too tired. 
29 H: Just come on down first, down here.
30 g_: To where?
31 H: It's below where you are now, below the clump of mi-sa bamboo, in the {ravine / 
river-bed / gulch}8. 
32 g_: Below here, huh?
33 H: Yeah, down here, down here.
34 g_: The gulch is deep, you know! I can't make it.
35 H: Come pick your way down the red {outcropping / peak}9 over on that side there. 
36 g_: By way of the red peak, you say?
37 H: Yeah, by that red peak--by that dark-colored one.
38 g_: I can't get down that precipice10 over there! The ground's too steep.11
39 H: [Use] the footholds, the footholds12--there're elephant footprints going around13 [the 
slope].
40 g_: If I make a false step, it's right down into the river!
41 H: So look where you're going! You've got eyes.
42 g_: Even with eyes I'm sure I'll fall! The ground's awfully steep.
43 H: You won't fall, you won't fall. Just get to that clump of trees over there, nice and 
slow--
44 g_: You're sure14 then, are you? That I won't fall.
45 H: Sure I'm sure!
46 g_: You can't be sure! You'll cause the death of a fellow-man! 
47 H: You won't die, you jerk.15
48 g_: Otherwise even if you get the animal, I won't live to eat it! 
49 H: You just stay up there on the mountaintop and wait. I'll carry it up for you, if that's 
the way you want it.16 
50 g_: Well now, in that case I'll just sit myself down nicely up there for you17…. Do be 
careful carrying it up here now--you down there! Shall I climb up there?
51 H: Sit18 and wait, sit and wait! I'll carry it for you, I'll bring it up for you.
[The deer is brought up the mountain]
52 g_: Wow, this barking  deer weighs as much as 1ta_ {plus / and} 5 baskets19 of paddy! 
It's heavy to carry. Isn't that right? 
53 H: Yes. It's 1 kh__20 and 5 qh___-l__(or __) There's no doubt about it.21
54 g_: How many animals have you ever gotten--ones like this?
55 H: Why, I've been shooting them down like this and eating them [for so long that] my 
teeth have turned yellow already!
56 g_: They're yellow because you smoke tobacco, more likely.
57 H: I have tried smoking those great big gold city22 cigars, you know. 
58 g_: Your teeth are yellow because you smoke, I'd say!
59 H: From eating barking-deer meat my teeth are all blocked up--there's white crud23 
[stuck] in the tips of my teeth.
60 g_: {That can't be true / You're full of it}…. I'm awfully hungry today! Where shall we 
go and eat? Let's get with it and cut up the {meat / carcass}.
61 H: I wrapped up [something to eat] and carried it along. A big package of sticky rice24. 
62 g_: Give it here! Let's mix it up [with the meat] and eat it together. 
63 H: Mix it up to eat, mix it up to eat--it's a phá-ka like Na-suh's father made25. 
[laughter]
64 g_: It probably doesn't taste too good then. If you call your [food] by that name.
65 H: It tastes good, I tell you! "Na-suh's father's phá-ka" means a big fucker26 of a cake, 
that's all.
66 g_: In a few minutes we'll get this meat cut up and we'll cook the headman's portion27. 
We'll sink28 our teeth into it!
67 H; Light a fire. Light a fire then.
[67a A woman who was listening to the recording breaks in: The headman's portion 
belongs to the elders!]
68 g_: Shall I make a fire?
69 H: Mm-hm.
70 g_: Gee, I don't have any pine-splinters29…. It's hard as hell to get it lit, isn't it?
71 H: Scratch us together some dry bamboo into a pile. Say a big fire30, strike a match, 
and set it ablaze. 
72 g_: If it's really [done with] dry bamboo it won't taste good at all, I tell you.
73 H: Don't let soot collect on it. We'll get diarrhea! 
[laughter]
74 g_: I'll push it in and 'tube-roast'31 it then. I'll cut off a misa-bamboo tube over there--
75 H: (Better) tie it to a stick and roast it, 'spit-roast' it! On a great big roasting-stick,32 as 
long as your arm.
76 g_: When you spit-roast it, the wood makes it stink of soot33! If you tube-roast it, then 
it's fine! 
77 H: Spit-roast it! Scrape (lit. 'beat') those embers over there [together into one place] 
and spit-roast it. 
78 g_: In that case split some wood in, too. Right over there, then.
79 H: Break off some day meh-paw wood34 and put it in. Pick up some dry meh-paw and 
some dry bamboo and put it in. 
[Sound of match being struck]
80a g_: Well, now, in a little while, it'll catch nicely and we'll have it cooked up35, right?
81b H: Mm-hm.
81c g_: When we're through eating in a few minutes, {how / which way} shall we go back 
[to the village]? {Why don't we / lit. "won't we"} do some more hunting on our way back? 
81 H: Let's go back hunting over there outside of Pa-ho village, in the Ju-neh river-
valley--over in those rattan thickets there. 
82 g_: (But) if we're carrying the meat like this, we won't be able to go through any rattan 
thickets! 
83 H: [If you don't want to hunt anymore on the way back] you go on up there to the 
[easy] road along the mountain, while I do some sneaky shooting36 down below--then I'll 
pick up [what I've shot] and carry it up to you!
84 g_: Ha! The way you do it all you can catch is birds!37
85 H: I'll catch him, all right. [There's an animal / He's] sleeping down there at the river. 
Big as life, with a hard-on38!
[laughter]
86 g_: You've got a foul mouth!39
87 H: Don't I though!40
88 g_: Animals have sharp ears.41 Things like barking-deer [run away at the first sound]--
because they don't have gall-bladders.42 
89 H: It's still way over there, the mountain after next. It's still far. He probably can't hear 
us.
90a g_: The mountain after next in that direction, eh?
90b H: Mm-hm.
90c g_: Nope. I bet you won't be able to go {quiet / stealthily} enough.
91 H: I'll flit along softly on my little tippy-toes43!
[laughter]
92 g_: Then your shins will get numb on you.
93 H: I'll twist my steps as I walk on tiptoes. So that I practically turn my [calf-] muscles 
inside out.
94 g_: You can't almost turn your muscles inside out that way!
95 H: Sure, I can actually44 get my calf turned around to the front [of my leg]! You just 
watch as I go twisting along! 
[laughter]
96 g_: What you say can't be true.45
97 H: I'll go carefully this time46, I tell you.
98 g_: Well then, I'll try going [my way too], right? So I'll climb up there to the mountain 
slope, up along the road, and I'll wait for you up there then, okay?
99 H: Watch me carefully. I'll {roll / twist} along47 till I get under that banyan down there.
100 g_: Right. So I'll sit and wait for you48 up on that high49 slope then.
101 H: A while back I-kha's father went down there, and a barking-deer jumped out and 
ran away!
102 g_: Down there, eh?
103 H: Yeah, over there--Hey, didn't you hear a shot50 just now down at the spur of the 
mountain51? 
104 g_: Well, since I'm high up here I can't hear too well, you know.
105 H: I'm sure there's shooting down there, coming from that clump of meh-paw52 or 
meh-ju-sheh trees on the barren mountain.53 
106 g_: What are they shooting at then? 
107 H: They're hunting squirrels! A little bunch of miserable young squirts54 down there.
108 g_: Who are they then, the ones down there? How many of them are there?55
109 H: It's Ja-ha and his crowd and that oaf Thu-yi and his crowd.56 They're mumbling 
away about something down there.57
110 g_: What {would you say / do they say} they're up to, those guys?58? What have they 
come to--
111 H: The barking-deer jumped in right among them, and they didn't even see it! It ran 
away down [the slope]!
112 g_: They won't get anything to eat.59
113 H: They probably won't now. That bunch of kids are awfully lazy.
114 g_: How many of them {would you say / do they say}60 have come? Are there any 
game-drivers among those who've come down there?
115 H: I saw some drivers just now driving [the game] down from an oldfield up over 
there.
116 g_: Up over there, huh?
117 H: Mm-hm
118 g_: Who are they, the game-drivers?
119 H: {They say / It looks like} the ones down there who are driving the game are 
north-country A-leh61 folk. The A-leh are supposed to have black tips to their turds, you 
know.
120 g_: Come on! You're really too much,62 you know….
[They fall into a story-telling mood]
Once upon a time there were some people--er--a father-in-law and a son-in-law. This 
man got himself a son-in-law, see. He was very happy [about it]. Well, so he cuts off this 
great big hunk of meat and boils it--[but] in this meat there was a little bit of gristle, see?
121 H: Uh-huh.
122 g_: Well, here they serve it up see, after the wedding, they put it down and here they 
are eating and this son-in-law he's sitting right next to his father-in-law, see. So he takes 
and bites off this great big piece, the biggest piece of all--and it happens to be the 
gristle! 
123 H: The gristle, huh?
124 g_: Right. He wants63 to {spit it out / throw it away}, but he can't. He's ashamed 
before his father-in-law. So he takes and bites into it with all his might, a little too 
violently, and the piece of meat rips off and his elbow pokes his father-in-law in the 
forehead, right between the eyes, and the father-in-law keels over! Nobody could do a 
thing. 
125 H: Gee, when you tell this [story] it reminds64 me of something that happened to me 
once a long time ago. 
126 g_: What was it?65
127 H: Once when I went over to Meu-heh and Meu-khaw,66 they boiled up some 
chicken to feed me and they put in about three fingers' worth of wild ginger. When I took 
and chewed it, I passed the hell out66! 
[laughter]
128 g_: Then there's a story67 about another person who passed out. He was riding along 
on a bicycle. He was headed for a government office building68 someplace.69 Well, on 
the way to the government office, there were paddy-field dikes,70 see. {It was a road that 
other people didn't go on much / There was nobody else on the road / It was an unusual 
route}. Well, there was this buffalo-herder up behind71 him on the road. From where he 
was behind him, he calls out to this old fellow [on the bicycle]: "Where are you going?" 
he says. Now [the guy] happens to be right near the water [in a paddy field], see. So, 
when he turns around to look up the road, the bicycle goes right down into the water. 
[The buffalo-herder] had just said to him, "Where are you going?," right? So he answers, 
"To the off--"72 
129 H: "To the off--?"
130 g_: Yeah, he didn't have time to say 'office,' so he could only say 'off--' before he 
sank into the water!
131 H: I see.
132 g_: Well, the bicycle was swallowed up down there. He couldn't get it back again. All 
he could get out was his hat, so he went back home and changed his {shirt / clothes}. 
Then he went off again.
133 H: I had a time like that once too. [I was walking] someplace when I shipped and fell 
heard over hells down off the edge of the path73!
134 g_: (laughing) Wow, that was too much, something like that!
135 H: When I looked around afterwards there I was smack under a clump of jujubes74! 
To think I'd landed down there! 
136 g_: That was really too much!
137 H: I was worried that somebody might see me screwing my way back up75 [to the 
road], so I climbed up in a hurry, hauled myself up and set myself [on the road] again, 
then I headed the hell back for home and reached my house. That really happened to 
me. 
138 g_: Nothing like that's ever happened to me yet.
139 H; Huh?
140 g_: I said, that has never happened to me yet.
141 H: It really happened. I skidded and fell downhill, by God. The safety-fence76 went 
smash too, I tell you. Against my shins as I fell down through it! 
142 g_: You must've been {happy / carefree} in those days!
143 H: Very happy.
144 g_: Well, how did you77 count the girls in those days, then?
145 H: I'd buy a pack of cigarette someplace, and I'd buy some perfumed powder,78 and 
I'd buy a box of matches, then I'd go scratching my matches down in the middle of the 
village, making big red flames. Then the girls would come and say "Give me a smoke,79 
give me a smoke!"
146 g_: Then how would you give them a smoke?
147 H: I'd say to them "Come on over there, let's go over there." When we got there I'd 
give each one of them a cigarette. Then I'd say, "I've still got lots more of these, f you'd 
like to smoke again. Let's go over there…."
148 g_: Aha. Well, then there's [a story about] another person. In this story it seems there 
was a certain woman. She got herself married, and her man was as happy as could be. 
(But) when the people were fed [at the wedding feast], he didn't eat, see. When night fell 
he said to his wife, "Give me {something to eat / my rice}." (But) there was no {food / 
rice}. Well, this fellow all of a sudden took up a--what do you call it--er, an earthen (rice-) 
pot, see, and stuck his hand in, and fished around in it for rice with his hand--with his 
fist. And it got stuck in there! Fishing around for rice it got stuck, and no matter what he 
did he couldn't get it out again. The fellow had a bald head, and the moonlight outside 
was shining, and the moonbeams struck his head, you see. As it was hitting his head, 
as the light was shining on it, [his wife]80 took [the pot] that was stuck [on his hand] and 
brushed him on the head with it. She thought it [= his head] was a rock, you see. And 
boy, were they a couple that was sorry afterwards!81--Let's stop here, okay?82 It's enough 
now, isn't it? 
149 H: I don't think it's enough yet. I'm sure there's a lot more [we could say]. 
150 g_: I bet it's enough, as much as we've done.
151 H: Hurry and keep going!
152 g_: My throat is killing me. I want to have a cigarette now. It's enough, okay?
153 H: Do you know what is meant by "Red Lahu" and "Lahu meu-neu"?83
154 g_: How do you mean?
155 H: When we say 'Red Lahu' and 'Lahu meu-neu.'
156 g_: Isn't it because the Red Lahu have red stripes on the skirts and jackets that they 
wear? So they're called 'Red Lahu.'
157 H: Well, what about 'meu-neu,' then? 'Meu-neu.'
158 g_: This calling them 'meu-neu' is supposed to be because they live up north-that's 
why they're called 'meu-neu' (=North-Country). 
159 H: I see. Then what about the ones called "A-leh"?
160 g_: [They're called] A-leh because they're supposed to be more ca-leh-ver than 
others!84 
161 H: Oh.
162 g_: So other people call them "A-leh." Because whatever they do they're ca-leh-verer 
at it than anybody else. 
163 H: They're supposed to be cleverer?
164 g_: Yes.
165 H: So that's why people give them that name, according to you!85 Their shit86 is 
black,87 too. Now I've also heard it said that the Red Lahu have red shirt. I wonder if it is 
red, like they say! 
166 g_: I daresay yours is black, too, your shirt.
167  H: I've never actually picked it out to look at it--my shirt-tips….
[laughter]
168 g_: In that case, do take a good look at it!
169 H: Well, I suppose it is black, at that. It's probably all quite black. 
170 g_: Mine is certainly black--Come on, now, that's enough already!
171 H: What--do you want to have a smoke?
172 g_: Yeah, that's enough already!
173 H: I've already smoked a big cigar. Aren't you smoking?
(A voice) 174 There aren't even any cigarettes.
175 g_: Enough now, I tell you!
176 H: You've had enough?
177 g_: It's awfully long already.
178 H: Oh, if you've had enough that's all right. 

Footnotes
1. Lit: "Whatever we do, we do it!"
2. Kehpatau_ is a Thai village below Huey Tad, in the valley of the same name.
3. fâ_ is really the generic term for all rodents: squirrels, porcupines, badgers, rats, etc. 
English 'rodent' has quite a different stylistic value, and is avoided in the translation.
4. c_ e ve lit., 'go around in circles,' 'wind one's way.'
5. cô __-nu _ "over there at that other place."
6. His hunting-dog. 
7. Lit., "(it's) going!"
8. There follow four unintelligible syllables. 
7. l__-qá-qo "river-hollow." Glossed in my notes as 'river-bank,' but I doubt this. CHECK.
8. l__-qhâ-qo "river-{path / line}-hollow." 
9. qh_-cu 'mountain-rounded part'
10. qh_ q__-l__ 'a steep mountain.'
11. mì ha lit., "ground is hard." 
12. __-qh___ 'layer; tier; notch'
13. t__-t__-n___ 'all around.' CHECK. The meaning 'a step' (__-t__-n___) is also possible: 
"There are steps--elephant footprints."
14. _i a 'know' + perfective particle. "To have something known" = be sure
15. The epithet is conveyed by the intonation on _i.
16. qhe qo l__ "in that case." 
17. The use of the benefactive Pv lâ is ironic here--"I'll do you a favor and sit down!"
18. m_ 'sit' is also used in the sense of 'rest.'
19. One tâ_ is about 250 lbs. There are ___ baskets in a tâ_. cf. TABLE OF WEIGHTS 
AND MEASURES, p. ___.
20. Cà-g_â_ possibly misspoke himself and meant to say kh__. See speech 53.
21. Lit: "There's no place for saying" = there's no gainsaying. 
22. kâ-th__ < Thai kept th___ CHECK THIS + ALSO THE GENERAL MEANING OF 57. 
23. qh__ 'excrement; any refuse, excretion, or dross.'
24. cà-n__-_ 'glutinous rice.' Used as provisions on outings away from home, because of 
its handy compactness.    
25. There is a joke here that the Lahu refused to explain to me because it refers to a 
particular incident that happened in the village. The meaning of phá-ka is unknown to 
me. Na-suh is a girl's name. Lahu adults are often referred to by the names of their 
oldest(?) child [teknonymy]. 
26. kh_-nú pà_-c__: kh_-nú is < Thai kh_n_m 'cake.' pà_-c__ is from pà_ 'copulate' and 
c__ 'stick together.' cf. the Mexican slang word cingada, meaning "a big lump of 
something."
27. __-__ ~ __-__ See _____. Since one of the hunters is the headman himself, they 
have the right to cook up that tender morsel immediately. 
28. chè_ câ 'bite and eat.' The hunters' delight and this product is understandable in 
view of the fact that the ordinary Lahu in this village only gets to eat meat a few times a 
year. 
29. a-k__: shards of pitch-pine, used for tinder.
30. b__-phu: à-mi b_-phu is how Lewis translates 'furnace' in the Bible.
31. {lá / cà_-lá} ve: to cook by inserting into a bamboo-tube and holding over a flame--
"tube-roast." Opposed to pì ve 'to roast by trying to a stick and holding over a flame'--
"spit-roast." See #75. 
31b. The lively pro-verb vâ, here meaning 'eat,' like the usual word câ 'eat' itself, occurs 
as the second member of opds relating to the preparation of food, but is best omitted 
in translation. 
32. __-pì: 'a spit-roast'--the meat together with the stick to which it is attached. 
33. ____-mu "wood-hair?" = soot from burning wood. CHECK.
34. m__-p__: kind of a perennial tree with jute-like bark and leaves like the papaya. 
Rope is made from the bark. (H.Y.)
35. The completed action Pv ò is preserved by the English 'have it V'ed.'
36. jâ_ b___ ve 'to shoot stealthily' = to hunt on noiseless feet.
37. Lit: "if it isn't birds, you don't catch anything to eat." A good translation might be 
'your shooting is for the birds!'
38. ni-qh___ pé __ te ve 'to have an erection.' Used also to mean 'obvious, very much in 
evidence, as hard to ignore as an erected penis.'
39. Lit: "It's too much, your [speech]."
40. This could also be taken to mean "What I say is true!"
41. Vh + p__ often means 'to be good at V'ing.'
42. According to traditional Lahu belief, the gall-bladder is the seat of courage in men 
and animals. 
43. Lit: "sneaking on tip-toes I'll fly through the air." mû-phe 'the region above'
44. The meaning 'actually' i_ conveyed by the Pv __ 'still'--i.e., "no matter what you say."
45. Lit. "It is not to such an extent, your [works]."
46. 'this time' translates the afterthought chi ___.
47. ___ ph__ "twist forth" is slang for 'go.'
48. m_ a lâ 'sit and wait for you': m_ 'sit,' a = ta 'action extended in time,' lâ 1 --> 2 
benefactive Pv. 
49. __-ma qh_ q__-l__ 'the upper mountain-slope.'
50. vâ is here used as a pro-verb for b___ 'shoot,' as is clear from qh_, the cef for 
gunshots. 
51. qh_-m__ 'mountain-tip, mountain-end.' This word apparently means 'summit' 
sometimes. CHECK.
52. See note #34. 
53. qh_-ni-qh_-k_ is apparently an <elab> meaning 'a mountain devoid of vegetation'--
so what are those trees doing or on it? e.g., it's not clear whether H. meant there were 
both kinds of trees there, or whether m__-p__ was a slip of the tongue which he 
corrected to m__-cu-___. This sentence is extremely difficult and presents several 
unsolved problems. CHECK.
54. ch_ lù-k__ 'ruined and rotten people = wretches.  yâ-q___-ku: an insulting term for 
an adolescent. 
55. __-m_ qhà-nî g_â le: lit. "how many names are there?"
56. The pluralizer h_ is usable after proper names. cf. Jse. Tanaka-san-tati 'Tanaka 
and his group/friends.' qa is an uncomplementary prefix to names. Thû-yì is actually 
one of the  
58. te câ "do to eat"--"to be unsuccessful in hunting." do for an envisaged advantage--
i.e., 'be up to.' 
59. The standard Lahu phrase for "to be unsuccessful in hunting."
60. This may be a peculiar use of the quotative pvf cê--it seems to refer to an 
anticipated 'quotation' to be supplied by the second person. Or maybe it's a reminder 
that Cà-g_â_ has already asked this question, "How many have come, I asked?!" 
Either of these senses may be the one intended in #110. 
61. m__-n__ A-l__: m__-n__ < Thai mya_ níya 'north-country.' 'A-leh' is the designation of a 
Lahu sub-tribe--exact portée unknown.
62. Lit: "It is already exaggerated, then."
63. Lit: "when he {would (in volitional sense) / tries to} throw it away again, he can't 
throw it away."
64. Lit: "when (you) say this, I had (sthg) once a long time ago."
65. Lit: "how was it?" 
66. Villages, whereabouts unknown. CHECK.
67. 'story' is conveyed by the quotative Pvf cê.
68. _á-ná-y__: _áná < Bse. 'gout office,' y__ < Lh. 'house.'
69. ô _ qhe "like over there."
70. ti-mi _-t__: raised earth-boundaries around an irrigated paddy-field, serving to 
keep the water from running out. 
71. yà_-q_ na pá "the upper part of the road"--i.e., the part the man on the bike had 
already taused--the part behind him.
72. The original is in Thai: "paj am--." He doesn't have time to finish his phrase "paj 
amph__" _ "(I'm) going to the government office."
73. This was a serious matter, since he could have fallen several hundred feet to his 
death.
74. The jujube-branches broke his fall.
75. <q___ pà_ q___ la>: thi_ pà_ is probably to be identified with the verb 'to copulate'--it is 
here being used as an obscene pro-verb in an <elab>. 
76. k__-tà: tà _ 'stick,' k__ ≠ lac-wood? Sticks planted by the side of steep mountain paths. 
CHECK
77. The Pn m_ is a story topicalizer. 
78. phû-d_ h__: phû-d_ < Bs < Eng 'powder.' h__ < Shan 'sweet-smelling'
79. t_ ve: The causative of d__ ve 'to drink, to smoke.'
80. This story is poorly told. The only way any sense can be made out of it is to assume 
that 'his wife' is the subject of this clause. 
81. bo te ve means 'to repent' among its other shades of meaning.
82. Cà-g_â_ is tired of talking into the tape-recorder.
83. "If you know when we say 'Red Lahu' and 'Lahu men-ren,' how do we mean?"
84. The Lahu original has the pun l___ 'clever' (< Shan) / a-l__.
85. This sentence and the next are far from clear. The implication seems to be that the 
A-leh are a sub-tribe of Black Lahus.
86. qh__-m__: lit., 'turd-tips'
87. nâ_ is used for both brown and black, indeed for any dark color. 

 





