#85 B. Courting Badinage
12 H: Hm, this old fellow your [just] told about--did he live a long time ago?5 
13 Khù-m__: Yes.
14 Thû-yì: Well, Khumaw, where would you like to go anyway?
15 K-m: I've come to visit. 
16 T-y: Aren't you planning to go visit over there now?6
17 K-m: No, I came to visit here.
18 T-y: Pa-eh, what about you--
19 H: He's probably going to go around visiting on a day like today, Sunday. There's no 
sense in just hanging around7--you shouldn't8 just lie around {blinking your eyes sleepily 
/ lackadaisically}! Get moving! 
20 K-m: We'll go count the girls over there.
21 H: So you're going courting, huh?
22 K-m: Don't' you guys want to go?
23 T-y: Where to?
24 K-m: Over there--you know.
25 T-y: Over there, at Meh-Jweh--9
26 H: Up there …. don't' you know the way [to get there]?
27a  : See there! She's wearing black!10
27b T-y: … I'm going to go. 
28 Pà-__: We have three of four people [who want to go]!
29 H: Get together and go, get together and go, you young fellows. When I was your 
age11 I used to go, all right!
30 Kachin: You should please cut me in on the deal!12
[Laughter. Everybody talks at once.]

31 H: How many are there, did you say? How many girls?13
32 Pà-__: There are four or five of them.
33 H: Four or five?
34 Pà-__: Yes.
35 T-y: How many good-looking ones are there?
36 Pà-__: They're all good-looking.
37 T-y: There's one who isn't so bad as the others anyway!14
38 Pà-__: There is one--she's a little better than the others.
39 T-y: That's the one! The one for me! 
40       : No, no, no! … She's mine!
41       : Like hell she's yours15!
42 Pà-__: She's mine. I'll give you guys the inferior16 ones.
43 T-y: Well, in that case I'm not going--I won't go.
44 H: I'll divide them up for you, I'll divide them up for you. As for Numero Uno,17 she'll 
be for this gentleman. Numero Dos17 is for this little mother18, and this guy gets Numero 
Tres.17
45 T-y: Hey, that's no good, Numero Uno is mine! 
46 H: Oh, you can't act that way! 
47 Càbo: Good grief, you have no sense of shame19! 
48             Numero Uno is mine!
49 T-y: Well, don't fight about it like that!
50 Pà-__: The one who is Numero Uno is mine, I tell you! She's not yours.
51 T-y: You guys are friends, and there you are fighting!
52 Pà-__: We're laying conflicting claims to a girl, see?20
53 Càbo: He says they're fighting over a girl. 
54 Kachin: Well, if you people don't want her, why don't you parcel her out to me!
55 T-y: She's tiny, why don't you tell him! That "Numero Uno" of his.
56 Pà-__: Yes, Numero Uno certainly is mine.
57 T-y: Let's take her--if only we succeed in counting her.21
58 H: Well, so this Numero Uno is a tiny one, is she!
59 Pà-__: You guys are impossible, just impossible! We can't go on arguing this way.22
60 Càbo: Are you going to have a fight?
61 Pà-__: We'll have a fight.
62 Càbo: Who was the first one to see that girl?
63 Pà-__: I saw her first.
64 T-y: After he saw her he said he'd give her to me if I wanted her! Right there on the 
road [was where he said that]!
65 Càbo: Then whoever saw her first, that fellow gets the good-looking one. As for the 
inferior ones, the ugly ones, we'll give them all to Jakeh and the Little Red Savage23 
here! 
[Laughter]
66 Pà-__: The Kachin said he'd take one like that.
67 T-y: Well, whoever wants that kind can have them.24 Pà-__, let's you and me go 
visiting someplace else! It's not as if there were no other fish in the sea,25 you know. 
Otherwise,26 no matter how nicely we discussed it, we'd have to come to blows, friends 
that we all are. 
68 Pà-__: There are some over around Pá-ló and Pá-mà_.
69 H: There are millions of them, I bet, when it comes to that.
70 Pà-__: Plenty of 'em, plenty of 'em.
71 H: Oh, so you're very well informed, are you?27
72 Pà-__: I know whereof I speak!28
72b       : I'll let29 …
73 Kachin: I know a thing about it too.
74 Pà-__: Since there are pretty ones and ugly ones--
75 Càbo: Well, if you observe how a female30 does her work, and her behavior31, then 
you'll know!--whether she has a kood32 character or not. 
76 H: Look carefully [for a wife], my boys! It's not as if [you were buying] a basket33 or 
something, you know. You don't get one today and throw it away tomorrow!34
77 Pà-__: They are like baskets!
78 H: According to the wise old saying, [a wife] is the "flower of the hearth and home."35
78a Càbo: [inaudible]
79 H: [If you marry (inaudible) someone unsuitable] you're liable to get tired of being 
married to her. So watch your step! 
80 Pà-__: If she doesn't have a good character then she's an old basket.33 If she does 
have a good character, she's not a basket.
81 H: Hm, well, then, why don't you fellows stop this business now. Let me tell you a 
story. Just listen. How about it?
82    : O.K.

Footnotes
5. The Headman is just trying to get the conversation started again. 
6. I.e., 'wouldn't you rather go find some girls?'
7. g__ ch__ "be doing for pleasure, be fooling around" vs. ca g__ tô "go around for pleasure, 
go on a round of visits."
8. Clause + (m)â hê_ o =  "one shouldn't + clause." Lit, "it is not (a case of) clause." See 
also below, speeches 46, 76, etc.
9. The rest of the sentence is indecipherable, as is most of the Headman's following 
speech.
10. This sentence was said at the same time as Thû-yì's speech 27b.
11. Lit, "when I was like you."
12. The Kachin is an older man, something of a clown. He was still single, since Lahu 
girls hesitate to marry members of different tribes. Lit: "Please share together with me."
13. Less colloquially: yâmîhá qhà-nî g_â c__ le qô_ ve.
14. kh__ ve < Shan kh_n 'superior': "to be the best of a poor lot, to be comparatively 
good."
15. the kh__ + X: "what nonsense to say X!" thôo _ pòthôo (Interj.), kh__ _ 'words.'
16. __-h__ "that which is below, something inferior."
17. The headman uses Thai numbers for the rankings, for comic effect. This is 
rendered by the Spanish translation. 
18. The word for 'mother' seems here to be used ribaldry for 'guy' (CHECK)--a striking 
cross-cultural coincidence.
19. Lit., "you don't even know the way of shame."
20. v_ dà_ ve: 'to vie; dispute a claim with one another.'
21. mâ_ g_a ve 'to have one's courting crowned with success.'
22. "As for speaking words, doing this way is not mutually possible anymore.""
23. Cà-qu-ní "Mr. Red + Naked." This is Thû-yì's nickname. [CHECK - who is Cà-q__? 
Is that somebody's nickname, too? Maybe they both refer to T-y]
24. "If it's that kind, whoever gets, gets."
25. Lit: "because it is not the case that there are [girls] only in this one place here."
26. I.e., if there were no girls anywhere else.
27. "Do you know very well?" 
28. "I really know!"
29. All that is decipherable of this (probably obscene) remark is the Pvf expressing 
probability, n__-_. 
30. __-s_-ma, lit. 'a female body.'
31. <tâ-hê_-tâ-cà_> < Shan; cà_ ult < Bs.
32. Càbo says tà_ instead of dà_, imitating the Kachin's accent.
33. <Khá-pù khá-lu> "baskets" CHECK.
34. h___ means both 'get' and 'marry.' bà means both 'throw away' and 'divorce.'
35. <y__-vê_-qa-vê_>. 
