92 The Trickster and the Old Bonze

1. Once upon a time, a certain old bonze [1] took the Trickster [__-qh__] along with him to go 
carry salt.
2. He [the bonze] was riding a horse.
3. As for the Trickster [__-qh__], [the bonze] made him go on foot.
4. After a while he made the Trickster carry the salt.
5. He [the bonze] arrived at a certain place on horseback, and stopped to rest.
6. At this point Trickster knocked loose [2] some cow-sage beans [3] onto the horse's saddle.
7. Then when the two of them continued on their way and reached a certain point, [the bonze] 
said, "Hey, Trickster, are you finding it easy {pleasant} to carry the salt?"
8. The Trickster said, "Oh, it's {very easy/ a lot of fun}. It's not at all tiring. And how is it going 
with you?" he asked.
9. "Oh, I can't ride this horse. My {arse/ ass} is {itching like mad/ so itchy}. It's most 
unfitting!" he said.
10. Then he said, "Say, Trickster, let me carry your salt. You come ride the horse."
11. Then [the bonze] went further ahead.
12. Once he [the bonze] got further ahead, the Trickster knocked away what he had knocked [i.e., 
the cowsage] onto [the saddle], and went riding along.
13. Having ridden along he reached the outskirts of a strange village [4], and stayed there [waiting 
for the bonze to catch up].
14. By the time the old bonze carrying the salt also reached the village, night had fallen.
15. When it got dark he said to Trickster, "How shall we [dual] hide away this salt?" [5]
16. Trickster said, "Let's hide it down there inside that pond!"
17. Early the next morning, when the two of them went to look for the salt they had hidden, they 
couldn't find it.
18. It had all {become/ dissolved in the} water.
19. He [the bonze] said to the Trickster, "__-qh__, I wonder what happened! I can't find the salt!"
20. Trickster said, "the fish have eaten it, the fish have eaten it. Let's hurry and drain this {pool/ 
pond}."
21. As they were draining it, some pa-n‡-t__ [6] came out, and Trickster slapped them to death.
22. When some catfish [7] emerged, [Trickster] made [the bonze] slap them [too]. [8]
23. So this old bonze {hurt a lot/ suffered a world of pain}
24. Since he hurt so much, he said to Trickster, "You're going to have to carry me.  If you don't 
carry me I can't make it."
25. Thereupon Trickster said, "Take it easy, take it easy! I'll go look for somebody to carry 
you."
26. So he wound his way upwards and dislodged a rock so it would roll downhill.
27. When [Trickster] said, "Run! If it's not a tiger, it's a bear! Run!" the old bonze ran back 
home.

[1] I.e., Buddhist monk. < French < Pg. bonzo < Jse. bonso_ < Chinese, 2nd syll. ultimately 
Sanskrit
[2] d™_-pu_: 'sprinkle by striking' ("strike-pour")
[3] ph__-(h‡)-le 'cowsage; horse-eye bean' [Mucuna pruriens] a creeper with fuzzy brown 
beans containing an itchy substance. (DL 921)
[4] _u qh‰_: lit. "other peoples' village".
[5] So it won't be stolen during the night.
[6] An edible black fish with a white belly, about a foot long. Also called pa-n‡-qay.
[7] Spiny bottom feeders
[8] Thus lacerating his hand on the spines
