94 The Fingerless Lord

1. Once there was a certain lord.
2. Under this lord there was a high minister. [1]
3. One day during the time this minister was in the lord's service, while he was staying close [3] 
by him, one of his [the lord's] middle fingers rotted and broke off.[2]
4a. When this middle finger rotted off he showed it [his hand] to the minister.
4b. "Minister, one of my fingers—one of my middle fingers has rotted off.
4c. "What shall I do? Come here, and look!"
4d. When [he] said this, and when the minister came and [he] showed it [to him], [he] said, "My 
lord, everything that happens is for the best." [4]
5. So the lord immediately became angry, and since he was so furious, while he was thinking 
[about what to do], he took [the Minister] along far into a forest, where he [the lord] saw a place 
where there was a {deep hole/ pit} in the ground.
6a. When he saw this place, he said to the minister, "Come here quickly, come here quickly!  I 
wonder what that is over there!"
6b. And the minister came and while he was straining to see, [the lord] {gently/ slowly} pushed 
him so he fell in[to the pit].
7. After the minister had entered the pit [5], when the lord {one day/ once} was going {to a 
certain place/ someplace}, he found himself face to face with a large band of savages who ate 
human flesh.
8. When [they/ the cannibals] saw him they wanted to eat his flesh, but when they were about to 
kill him, they said "Take a good look at everything about this person that is different from other 
people [6]—one of his middle fingers is {not there/ missing}!"
9. For this reason they couldn't eat him, and when this happened, all of a sudden he realized 
something —he recognized his good fortune.
10. So since he came to realize [the truth of] the minister's [words] "Everything that happens is 
for the best," he straightaway turned back and had the minister pulled out [of the pit].
11. If we say "What {meaning/ moral} can we extract from this?" everything that happened 
previously, all the things we complained and bickered about, are all for the best!
12. Somebody corrects him: I suppose so. [7]

Footnotes:
[1] a-mà_-ló: < [WB _amat] 'minister; vizier; high official'.
[2] 'while staying close' translates the reduplication of ch__ (V) 'be in a place; dwell'.
[3] The Lahu verb-particle/ Pv _e_ (called _e_R or the "_e_ of regret" in GL) signifies that the 
speaker regards the verbal event as unfortunate. It is normally left untranslated.
[4] __-bo __ ve: lit. "the advantage/ grace" is great. For a discussion of the different nuances of __-
bo(n) in the animist, Christian, and Buddhist contexts, see DL 186-7.
[5] Presumably he had to stay there for some time, with food periodically thrown down to him.
[6] _u l_	 mâ 	_u_.
others matter 	NEG	be the same
These words recur in the common expression _u l_ _u_ la (Pv 'become) ve 'come up in the 
world; be as respectable as others'.
[7] The narrator ends with the emphatic Pnf m__ after the declarative Pnf yò. The heckler 
substitutes the suppositional Pnf n__-__ for m__.
