95 Further Adventures of the Trickster (or The Trickster Finds a Novel Way to Catch Flies and 
Gains Half a Kingdom)

1. Once upon a time there was a certain person called Eh-Hk'eh (__-qh__).

2. {Day after day/every day} he would {fish/whip} out his prick [1] and {catch/trap} insects [2] 
with it.

3. When a fly would come within reach he would cover it up under his clothes [3]

4. Once it happened to be a honeybee [that he trapped].

5. When the honeybee happened along, he covered it up under his clothes, and it stung him.

6. When he got stung, because where he tried to cover it up and where it stung him was the same 
place, [he cursed it, saying, "This bee is a wretched foul bee!"][4]

7. So then, {after/when} he whipped out his prick [again] and managed to trap an insect [with it], 
he went to a place where chickens were fed, and let them go free.

8. Right away the chickens pecked at [the trapped bug] and nibbled it [5].

9. {While/when} the chickens picked and nibble [at him] he sobbed bitterly, that guy.

10. So they gave him one chicken [as compensation].

11. After he got the chicken he then went to a place where pigs were fed, and proceeded [6] to let 
it [the chicken] go free.

12. So then the pigs bit it to death.

13. When they bit it to death, he sobbed bitterly.

14. Since he was sobbing [so much], they proceeded to give him a pig—they [just] gave it to him.

15. So leading the pig, he went and let it go free in somebody's cattle-pen.

16. When he set it free in there, {a cow/the cows} kicked it the hell [7] to death.

17. So then he sat down there and sobbed with all his might.

18. Since he was crying [so much] they gave him a cow.

19. Leading this cow, this time he went and set it free in an elephant corral.

20. So then the elephant(s) killed that cow of his.

21. Whereupon he sat down there and cried his eyes out.

22. Since he was crying [so much] they proceeded to give him an elephant.

23. Then, leading this elephant he went and let it go free {where somebody was making earthen 
pots/ in a potter's workshop}.

24. His elephant stepped on the pot(s) and shattered [them].[8]

25. Since it had trampled his pots to pieces, the other guy [the potter] {took/got} his elephant.

26. So then he sat down there and wept bitterly.

27. While he was crying, a bird came and called to him.

28. What that bird was {calling/singing} was kru-g_â_ kru-g_â_.[9]

29. So then he [__-qh__] {let fly with/hurled} a potsherd at it, and {got/hit} it.

30. He caught it, plucked it and roasted it, and it was very fat.

31. Since it was so fat, he smeared [some of] this fat onto his prick.

32. As soon as he had smeared it on, his prick began to sing.

33. It sang kru-g_â_ kru-g_â_, and no matter what he did it didn't get better [10].

34. So then, when he {cauterized/scorched} [his penis] with a hot potsherd, he was cured.

35. So then he took along some of that bird-fat and went to a place where a princess was doing 
some weaving.

36. Then after he had smeared some of that bird-fat onto her {stool/chair}[11], her pussy {began 
to sing/started singing}.

37. When her pussy sang, it just sang kru-g_â_ kru-g_â_.

38. So then they sought all the physicians in the {city/town} to {cure/treat} her.

39. [But] no matter who treated her, she did not get {better/cured}.

40. Whoever it was who treated her, she was not cured.

41. Finally they said to __-qh__, "Oh, if you cure this woman, take her for your wife!

42. "And furthermore, if you can cure her, you will be given half of the kingdom," they said to 
him.

43. So then __-qh__ went and scorched [her] with that hot potsherd, and she was cured.

44. She was cured, so he got the princess, and also got control of half the country.

Footnotes:

[1] Since Lahu has only a sing word for the sexual organs (ní 'penis', cha 'vagina') it is a problem 
choosing among the myriad English synonyms to find the ones that fit best stylistically in a given 
context. I here choose 'prick' since it has respectable antecedents (e.g., appearing in 
Shakespeare), although more jocular terms like wiener might fit the mood of the story better.
[2] p__ can either mean 'insect in general' (the sense here) or more specifically, 'mosquito'. It is 
not clear what aspect of the Trickster's organ was so attractive to insects.
[3] _ô_-b_ (V) lit. "press-cover" 'cover an exposed part with one's clothing'.
[4] The end of this sentence is virtually inaudible on the original tape, so I have supplied an 
ending for it {subject to Maung-Maung's criticism}: chè_ ve tê yân thâ, y__ _ô_-b_ a ve kà_ 
chè_ ve kà_ tê kà tí te ve pa-t_, ["pê chi p__-lù-p__-k__ qô_-ma," y__ dê pî ve yò].
[5] The painfulness of this experience for the Trickster is emphasized by _e_ (Pv) 'regretful 
state of affairs'.
[6] 'proceeded' is an attempt to translate q___ (vV) 'go on and do something else'. See sense #5 of 
q___ in DL:259.
[7] 'the hell' translates g___ (vV) 'vivid/violent action'.
[8] nâ_-khô 'shatter by stepping on'
    step	shatter
[9] This imitative sequence kr- does not occur in any other Lahu word. This binome is also used 
as a noun, to signify species of dove-like bird. See DL:362.
[10] I.e., he couldn't stop his penis from chirping.
[11] The raconteur leaves out any mention of the princess sitting down on her weaving-stool, but 
that is taken for granted.
