9 Agriculture and the Need for Unity
[Tape 1,  Side 2 #4 and Tape II, Side 1 #1]
1: So, this time we'll have a discussion about how we Lahu {grow our crops / practice 
agriculture / farm our land}. Well, whereabouts will all of you in the village grow your 
crops this year? 
2: Well, I['ll be] down below. Where I farmed last year. Probably I'll try elephant's-Death-
Valley.1
3: Mm, I['ll be] over there [gesture]. I'll work around Thai-lai.2 I won't stay--er, I won't 
come down below. The elephants eat [the crops] up all the time [down there].
4. Ha, ha! 
5: Oh, my brothers! When human beings3 are few and not numerous,4 [they should] 
seek their livelihood together. Don't each work in a different place. If someday [one of 
you] should get sick or fall on bad times,5 [there would be] nothing he could [do]. We 
mustn't have our heads full of stones, you know.6
6: Well, as far as I'm concerned, I'm going to {farm / work} over there. Down below I will 
not go. I'll work all by myself.
7: Ha, ha!
8: Well, {if that's the way you feel (or it is) / in that case}, you really ought to pay 
attention to the words of our forefathers: "When we cultivate the soil, if we work all 
together,7 even if sickness or bad times should befall, to look after one another, to help 
one another, to do for one another is easy!"   
9: Can't you work that way, too? Must everybody work all by himself? 
10: Ah, me! Ah, me!
11: It's absolutely right, that saying! We ought to work together. 
12: When you get sick and weak, you can't go lifting and carrying if you're all alone.
13: Well, whatever happens, even if you say "I won't listen!" to my words of advice as 
we talk to each other, even if you people each work the land by yourself, as you have 
been intending to--wherever you work, [at least] work well! Cultivate the soil properly, 
and try to gain your food and drink, so that you will not be inferior to others.8
14: For my part, I['m going to] clear my land.9 Even if it's all by myself, even if I'm the 
only one, I'll clear my land over there. I'll be [there] clearing it off, from now on.
15: But we can't act this way, brothers! Now, at this moment, [you know] we are few and 
not numerous10! We ought to earn our living together, happily and cheerfully,11 and filled 
with love.12 People like us, we Lahu, you know that there aren't masses and hordes13 of 
us! There are only a few of us! If someday somebody gets sick, [it shall not be that] no 
one sees it; if someone is about to die, it should not be that no one sees it. There aren't 
too many of us, and that's a fact! 
16: As for me, I'm going to hack out an oldfield.14
17: You're hacking out an oldfield, are you?
18: Yes.
19: Well, even from an oldfield one can hack out a living. 
20: It's jut that it's kind of overgrown with weeds.
21: [Yeah], the weeds are thick [in an oldfield].
* * *
22: Well, this year--has everybody in our village finished clearing the trees from his land 
this year? 
23: Oh no, I haven't finished [my] clearing yet. I haven't finished, but there's nothing I 
can do about it. Some Thais set my land the hill on fire for me!15 I don't know now if I'll 
be able to do my second-burning,16 either.
24: Yeah, mine hasn't burned over thoroughly, either! I guess I'll still have to re-burn for 
two or three days now. 
25: Ah, if only you had listened that day to the words your elders spoke, if only you had 
been working together today in one group, as unit, they wouldn't have set fire [to your 
land]. If you had looked after it, if you had taken care of it….17 But today, since you paid 
no attention to your elders' words, and each acted according to his own way of thinking, 
they set fire to you and here you are unable to do your second-burning. 
26: There's nothing to be done. You didn't listen that time, you paid no attention to what 
was said, and now this is what happened! All you an do [at this point] is reborn as much 
as possible18 and [try to] {cultivate that much / live off that much}. This year your fields 
aren't burned off, and who knows whether you'll get any rice to eat or not. 
27: Ah, my brothers, all of you! When [we live] in loving harmony--even if  someone 
once disregarded advice--we must help one another! We mustn't squabble with each 
other like this. By helping each other in the proper way--er, by doing this--we will earn 
our food and drink and will not be inferior to others. And if we can [also] clothe and 
garb19 ourselves like the others, the Lahu community20 will prosper.21 On the other 
hand,22 if we don't act [properly] this way, when one person gets in trouble, others will 
suffer for it.23
* * *
Well, the fields--er, has everybody finished reburning his field by now? If you've finished, 
say no so!24
28: Oh, it's all finished--mine, that is.
29: Well, if you're really finished, it's time now to plant the rice! Have you all tried 
planting [your] rice yet?
30: Well, I've only managed to begin trying to plant a little so far. This week I'll get to 
begin trying to do more and more.25
31: Well then, Jali, how many acres26 have you finished [planting] already? 
32: Oh, I've still only finished one acre. I've only managed to plant one acre so far….27
33: One acre, eh.
34: {Your plans now-- / What you've been planning--} how many acres have you been 
thinking of planting?
35: According to my plans, I've been thinking of planting five acres.28
36: Five acres. 
37: Hm-hm.
38: Yeah, if you do that you'll certainly earn your food and drink and won't be {inferior to 
others / less well-off than anyone else}. 
39: Well, Kheh-ki, how many acres will you plant? 
40: Well, I've been thinking of planting five or six acres, too. I'll simply try to do as much 
as I can. I'm just beginning to work on it now--and the time still isn't too late….29
41: Right. Go to it! Well, then, Sexton30, how many acres will you plant? 
42: Oh, I think I'll plant ten acres! 
43: Wow!
44: But at this point, all I've gotten done is to make a field-hut.31
45: Well, do your best! As our forefathers used to say:
Slow to till and toil--rats!
Slow to drive away--rats!
Slaves and thralls of others!
If you're slow to till and toil:
Rat food, bird food.32
Everybody ought to hurry up and reburn his land properly, and cultivate it. 
46: I haven't even finished my reburning yet!
47: Tomorrow--for sure33, I'm planning to go way off over there, to the place where they 
say some people smeared hot peppers on a [man's] prick long ago,34 to scoop out a 
honeycomb to lick. 
48: Oh, I'm going to! As far as honey-scooping goes, I've seen a [bees']-hollow {too / 
myself}. Over there above the river-bed on Porcupine Mountain.35 Say, let's go together, 
shall we? 
49: Yeah, we can certainly go together. 
50: Early tomorrow morning when it's time to go you just call me, too, okay? The two of 
us will go off together at the crack of dawn.36 I've seen a [bees']-hollow myself.
51: Okay, [but] don't do to me what somebody else did that time.37
52: If I [say I'll] go, I'll go. Don't talk nonsense to me. 
53: Let's go together, happily and with good cheers! 
54: Because we two have never yet broken a promise. Whenever anybody discusses 
something and decides on it, we just have a go at it.38 We'll go early tomorrow morning. 
55: Right, we've never broken [a promise] in the past.
56: Say, let's take the dogs along, too! Pastor! Kheh-ki! Jali! We'll go shoot ourselves 
some macaques39 and little gibbons.40 We'll go bag ourselves all kinds of porcupines41!
57: Well, then, Jali, you can bring your dog along!
58: Yeah, sure I can take mine along. [But] he can't hunt monkeys, you know!
59: I bet he can hunt barking-deer, though. Even if he can't hunt monkeys. 
60: Sure he can hunt, sure he can hunt barking-deer.
61: So, that's how we'll go then!
62: Well, as far as deer are concerned--er, I mean, if you just shout and make noise at 
the hunting-grounds,42 even if the dogs {don't know how to / can't} give chase, those 
monkeys will come out [all by themselves]. But as far as barking deer are concerned, if 
the dogs don't chase them, they won't come out. At the hunting-grounds we'll chase 
them and beat them and get them, we'll chase them and shoot them and get them! We'll 
sneak up on them and shoot them. 
63: This is the time when we've already gone and secured places to grow our crops, 
and managed to plant our rice--we've been able to finish the planting--and so we just go 
and hunt, hunt, hunt [for game] to ear, and earn our living in joy and gladness. 
* * *
64: Well, Sexton, they say some wild boars have eaten your paddy, is that right? 
65: Yes.

Footnotes
1. hwei-cà-tái (= No. Thai.). The origin of this name is unknown to me, but can easily 
be guessed at. 
2. A rocky area near the village, also called by the Thai ph_a-d__y 'Red wall.' ô _ 
'over there'--i.e., 'off to the side,' as distinct from mô _ 'down below.'
3. 'human beings' rather than 'people' is intended to convey the sense of ch_ qô_ ve l__ 
"as for people" (cf. Jse. __ Japanes phrase).
4. <mâ mâ mâ g___> elab. "not many not numerous."
5. <nà la g__ la> elab. "become sick become wretched."
6. Proverb: ó-qo há-p_ k_ a ve mâ hê_ "One shouldn't act stupidly." The 'you know' 
renders the Pvnf l_ 'since, became.'
7. tê p___ tí 'all together': lit. "at the same time."
8. _u l_ _u tù te ve: "to do so as to be in the same situation as others." This phrase is 
often used to express the ambition of the Lahu as a people to become as well off as 
other groups. Another phrase for the same concept is _-la-mu-la tù te ve, "to do so as to 
become big and high"--i.e., to make progress in the world's eyes. 
9. h_ the ve 'to clear away the trees from a new field-site'" one of the first steps in the 
Lahu agricultural cycle. 
10. See fn. 4. The 'you know' is intended to connivery the sense of the Pvf ve-_.
11. <hal__-haqa>. 
12. <ha-ha p__-p__>.
13. <__-mo __-cú>.
14. h_-g___ ph__ câ ve: h_-g___ 'field-bones' - a field that has already yielded a crop 
of the year before. ph__ ve 'to hack clear the undergrowth with a long sword.' The 
heavier work, h_ the ve (fn.9), is of course not necessary in the case of an 'oldfield.'
15. As a joke or through carelessness. This greatly complicated the timing of the 
various slash-and-burn operations.
16. h_ ji ve. The reburying - over of the field to consume the material left over from the 
first burning (h_ tú ve).
17. The particle lò 'contrary to fact,' which appears three times in this passage, is a 
loan form Shan, and is not otherwise attested in my texts. 
18. qhà-qhe c_ g_a chi qhe c_ V: 'to V as much as possible.'
19. <g_a v___ g_a d_>.
20. Lâhu tê y__ "the Lahu house."
21. p_-_a la 'come to be well-off [lit. "easy-born"].'
22. chi thà_ pat_ means 'for this reason,' but clearly the opposite meaning is intended.
23. Lit. 'when one person is in trouble, it is the same as the second person being in 
trouble.'
24. Lit. 'if [you've] finished, say "finished".'
25. Two splendid multiversatile concatenations in successive sentences! g_a ta ti a-
ni 'manage to begin trying to plant'; g_a ta te qai a-ni 'get to begin trying to do more 
and more.' 
26. tû 'the area one can sow with the seeds from one basket.'
27. The suspension marks '…' translate the Pvnf l_.
28. Lahu citative constructions are often both introduced and ended by the same 
citation marker: cf. y__ qô_ ve "X" chi qhe qô_ ve yò Lit., "what he said was: "X", he 
said." A less literal and more literate translation of this sentence would be simply 
"what I've been planning is to plant five acres."
29. See fn. 27.
30. Pù-c__ < Shan "church-person." The individual so called had the job of looking 
after the physical appearance of the hut used as a church by the village. 
31. A hut erected in the fields. During periods of intense work in the fields, the 
cultivator cooks, eats, and sleeps in his field-hut for days on end without returning to 
the village. 
32. A good example of an old poetic form: five lines, the first four with 6 syllables and 
the last with 4. A prose paraphrase follows: "If you're slow in tilling your land, the 
rodents (rats, porcupines, squirrels, etc.) will ruin it for you; if you're slow about driving 
the animals off your land, the rodents will ruin you. You will become the slaves of 
others. If you're slow in your tilling, your land (and you) will become food for the rats 
and the birds."
33. The 'for sure' renders qo q___, more emphatic than plain qo.
34. The incident in question involved a group of mischievous boys who played the trick 
on a man as he lay sleeping in the shade. 
35. fâ_-p__ qh_. fâ_-p__ is the 'brush-tailed porcupine,' a large species that lives among 
the rocks.
36. tê nà_ _á __ te l_: tê nà_ 'early morning' + _á __ (~ _ái) 'intensitive.' 
37. That is, on a previous occasion somebody had made a similar arrangement with 
him, but ended up by not keeping the appointment. 
38. qai ni ve 'have a try at going; go and see what happens.' Lit: "To the extent that 
anybody discusses and decides, we just go and see."
39. m___-ní-qwe 'the Rhesus macaque.' 
40. m___-nâ_ 'the white-handed gibbon' _____.
41. <fâ_-bu fâ_-p__> 'all kinds of porcupines' fâ_-bu 'the Asiatic p.' ____; fâ_-p__ see 
above fn. 35.
42. <g_à_-mû-g_à_-k__> lit., "hunting-skies-hunting-place."
