{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18380\viewh21300\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #8 A Lahu Hunting Expedition
\b0 \
1: Well, where shall we go hunting today?\
2: Well, over there out by Deer Hollow.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 3: Well then, where shall all of us in the village go hunting today anyway?\
4: Well, there at the Metalai [stream]. From above Red Rock to below Red Rock, then on down. We'll chase them down from above Metalai to Kh\uc0\u616 \u769 -y\u616 \u772 -kw\'ec [1], \
the place where Lawjo the Postman [2] shot the mountain-goat that time. \
5: Mm.\
6: Where shall each of us go to lie in ambush [3]?\
7: Me, I'll go wait at the hill near Hognose Deer Valley.\
8: I'll go wait at Goat-shoot [4].\
9: Down there, eh? I'm going to wait at the big stamping-ground right at the fork in the Hognose Deer River.\
10: I see. \
11: Well, as far as I'm concerned--I'll go wait at Goat-shoot.\
12: Hm. Well, you guys drive them well now!\
13: Hey, hey! Today I'm going hunting! Let's ambush 'em the right way! Everybody in his own ambush-point, lie in wait properly!\
14: Right! \
15: Well, now we're off to the hunt!\
16: (Two voices) Right!     \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 17: Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey!  Cho, cho, cho, cho, cho, cho, cho! Oh, we've flushed a wild pig! We've flushed a boar, we've flushed a boar! \
Come on, let's track him right! Everybody at his ambush-point, track him down right! We've flushed a boar! Ah, here come the dogs to help us look, too!\
18: Woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof!\
19: Here he goes, there he goes, there he goes! Cho, cho! \
			<A shot rings out>  \
20: What happened? Did they get him?\
21: Woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof, woof!\
22: Well, I think we hit him at least. But the bullet wasn't big [enough]! And 
\i his
\i0  gun jammed, damn it.\
23: The bullet drew a little blood. Come on, you dogs! Try to stick right on his trail, try to stick right on his trail. Come on!\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 24: The gun-setting probably wasn't big [enough]--on 
\i your
\i0  gun.\
25: Er--about my gun-setting--it was set for the squirrel-shooting that I did a while back, that's why. \
26: Oh, no! We won't get anything to eat then. Here we've been hunting all day long today, but you guys set your guns so small, \
all the trouble we went to was for nothing! We won't get a thing to eat. Try to stick to his trail at least!  It's a bad business.[5]\
27: we won't get a thing to eat. We won't get a thing to eat! You failure! You ass! You slob!\
28: Ha, ha, ha.\
29: Setting his gun that way!\
30: Hey, down there in the river valley the dogs are quiet all of a sudden!\
31: Hurry, let's go look! Hurry up, let's go take a look!\
32: The dogs are quiet! Hurry come look, hurry come look!\
33: Down there, down below; the dogs are quiet all of a sudden!\
34: Well, let's go have a look.\
35: What's going on?\
36: Oh! It dropped dead here! It died here!\
37: Shout to them! To everybody who's still up there on the mountain.\
38: Hey, come on! Get down there, they say! The boar dropped dead here! Call out to them, to everybody who's still up there on the hill! Come quick!\
Here's where we got him, they say! Here's where the boar died! Hurry up and come! Get a move on!\
39: Chop down some leaves, chop down some leaves! We'll divide him up right away. [6]\
40: Divvy up, divvy up, divvy up--let's divide him up!\
41: Divvy up, divvy up, divvy up!\
42: Keep an eye on the dogs. They'll eat the meat.\
43: O.K.\
			<Sounds of slicing up the boar>\
44: That dog of yours might get at the meat. [7]\
45: Scram, scram! For God's sakes, this bunch of dogs--they're acting like they caught him all by themselves!\
46: Keep watching the dogs! They're taking up pieces [in their mouths]. Look here!\
47: Scra-a-m!\
48: How many of us are there?\
49: Count us and see.\
50: Eight people.\
51: Eight people, eight shares.  And take out the "chief-slices" carefully, the pieces we have to give to the headman. [8]\
52: This one here--cut me one of the shank-joints. [9]\
53: What are you going to do with it?\
54: Boil the life out of it and eat it. [10]\
55: Oh. Ha, ha, ha.\
56: He says to cut him one of the shanks. He says he'll boil it to death and eat it. \
57: I cut it for him already. I cut it already.\
58: Well, it's divided, it's divided, it's divided now.\
59: There are eight people?\
60: Yes.\
61: Well, he's finished dividing it up into shares. Now take yours, take yours!\
62: Take 'em, take 'em, take 'em, take 'em!\
63: Take the biggest share, why don't you! He took the biggest--.\
64: Yes, I want this piece.\
65: I want this one.\
66: I'll take out this share.\
67: Well, I'll take this.\
68: Scoop up this blood carefully and feed it to the dogs first.\
69: Don't go feeding them, don't go feeding them, dogs like this aren't worth a damn.\
70: Because it was no thanks to them [11] that we caught anything, was it? \
71: Yeah.\
72: Well, now we should head back towards home, shall we? Today--.  \
73: Right!\
74: We'll just head back. Since we've had good hunting. [12] But we'll just head back and see what we can see. Since there's nothing [else] we can do now. \
75: I guess that's the end.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Footnotes\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 [1] This place-name means 'Hognosed Deer' [
\i Cervus porcinus
\i0 ]. It seems also to have been called \'a0Kh\uc0\u616 \u769 -y\u616 \u768 -q\u111 \u772  'Deer Hollow'.\
[2] This man was a friend of the Huey Tat villagers who used to be a postman in Shan State.\
[3] 
\b n\'e2\uc0\u660  ve
\b0   'to lie in wait in order to ambush the game.' One hunting party typically flushes the game while the others lie in ambush at various places, waiting for a chance to chase it (
\b \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e0\u660  ve
\b0 ).\
[4] 
\b h\'e2 b\uc0\u596 \u770 \u660  k\u616 \u768 
\b0 : the scene of Lawju's exploit. \
[5] 
\b ch\uc0\u601 \u768  ve
\b0  'to be all right; to work; be O.K.' 
\b ch\uc0\u601 \u768  t\'f9 m\'e2 h\'ea\u660 
\b0  'it's no good'.\
[6] The meat will be cut up and divided, each portion being wrapped up in a large banana-leaf. \
[7]
\b  p\uc0\u116 \u769 -\'e0
\b0  is used in warnings, rather like older English 
\i lest
\i0 .\
[8] 
\b \uc0\u596 \u768 -\'9a\u603 
\b0  "chief-slices." Part of every large animal killed in the hunt belongs by right to the headman, whether or not he was along on the hunting expedition. Among the Lahu the piece of meat in question is taken from the shoulder-blades. \
[9] A bony cut, consisting of the shin, knee, and part of the lower thigh. \
[10] 
\b c\uc0\u596 \u770  ve
\b0 : 'to boil something tough for hours until very soft'. Not the same as
\b  c\uc0\u596 \u769  ve
\b0  'to boil'.\
[11] 
\b c\'e2\uc0\u660  ve
\b0  'to be connected with; be due to.' \
[12] 
\b \uc0\u103 \u776 a l\u603 \u768 \u660  m\'e2 l\u603 
\b0 : "since we have gotten a lot to eat."\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
}