{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f2\fnil\fcharset129 AppleGothic;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13360\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 9/10 Agriculture and the Need for Unity
\b0 \
[Tape 1,  Side 2 #4 and Tape II, Side 1 #1]\
1: So, this time we'll have a discussion about how we Lahu \{grow our crops / practice agriculture / farm our land\}. Well, whereabouts will all of you in the village grow your crops this year? \
2: Well, I['ll be] down below. Where I farmed last year. Probably I'll try elephant's-Death-Valley.
\fs20 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub \
3: Mm, 
\i I['ll
\i0  be] over 
\i there
\i0  [gesture]. I'll work around Thai-lai.
\fs20 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  I won't stay--er, I won't come down below. The elephants eat [the crops] up all the time [down there].\
4. Ha, ha! \
5: Oh, my brothers! When human beings
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  are few and not numerous,
\fs20 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub  [they should] seek their livelihood together. Don't each work in a different place. If someday [one of you] should get sick or fall on bad times,
\fs20 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub  [there would be] nothing he could [do]. We mustn't have our heads full of stones, you know.
\fs20 \super 6
\fs24 \nosupersub \
6: Well, as far as I'm concerned, I'm going to \{farm / work\} over 
\i there
\i0 . Down below I will not go. I'll work all by myself.\
7: Ha, ha!\
8: Well, \{if that's the way you feel (or it is) / in that case\}, you really ought to pay attention to the words of our forefathers: "When we cultivate the soil, if we work all together,
\fs20 \super 7
\fs24 \nosupersub  even if sickness or bad times should befall, to look after one another, to help one another, to do for one another is easy!"   \
9: Can't 
\i you
\i0  work that way, too? Must everybody work all by himself? \
10: Ah, me! Ah, me!\
11: It's absolutely right, that saying! We ought to work together. \
12: When you get sick and weak, you can't go lifting and carrying if you're all alone.\
13: Well, whatever happens, even if you say "I won't listen!" to my words of advice as we talk to each other, even if you people each work the land by yourself, as you have been intending to--wherever you work, [at least] work well! Cultivate the soil properly, and try to gain your food and drink, so that you will not be inferior to others.
\fs20 \super 8
\fs24 \nosupersub \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 14: For my part, I['m going to] clear my land.
\fs20 \super 9
\fs24 \nosupersub  Even if it's all by myself, even if I'm the only one, I'll clear my land 
\i over there
\i0 . I'll be [there] clearing it off, from now on.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 15: But we can't act this way, brothers! Now, at this moment, [you know] we are few and not numerous
\fs20 \super 10
\fs24 \nosupersub ! We ought to earn our living together, happily and cheerfully,
\fs20 \super 11
\fs24 \nosupersub  and filled with love.
\fs20 \super 12
\fs24 \nosupersub  People like us, we Lahu, you know that there aren't masses and hordes
\fs20 \super 13
\fs24 \nosupersub  of us! There are only a few of us! If someday somebody gets sick, [it shall not be that] no one sees it; if someone is about to die, it should not be that no one sees it. There aren't too many of us, and that's a fact! \
16: As for me, I'm going to hack out an oldfield.
\fs20 \super 14
\fs24 \nosupersub \
17: You're hacking out an oldfield, are you?\
18: Yes.\
19: Well, even from an oldfield one can hack out a living. \
20: It's jut that it's kind of overgrown with weeds.\
21: [Yeah], the weeds 
\i are
\i0  thick [in an oldfield].\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 22: Well, this year--has everybody in our village finished clearing the trees from his land this year? \
23: Oh no, I haven't finished [my] clearing yet. I haven't finished, but there's nothing I can do about it. Some Thais set my land the hill on fire for me!
\fs20 \super 15
\fs24 \nosupersub  I don't know now if I'll be able to do my second-burning,
\fs20 \super 16
\fs24 \nosupersub  either.\
24: Yeah, mine hasn't burned over thoroughly, either! I guess I'll still have to re-burn for two or three days now. \
25: Ah, if only you had listened that day to the words your elders spoke, if only you had been working together today in one group, as unit, they wouldn't have set fire [to your land]. If you had looked after it, if you had taken care of it\'85.
\fs20 \super 17
\fs24 \nosupersub  But today, since you paid no attention to your elders' words, and each acted according to his own way of thinking, they set fire to you and here you are unable to do your second-burning. \
26: There's nothing to be done. You didn't listen that time, you paid no attention to what was said, and now this is what happened! All you an do [at this point] is reborn as much as possible
\fs20 \super 18
\fs24 \nosupersub  and [try to] \{cultivate that much / live off that much\}. This year your fields aren't burned off, and who knows whether you'll get any rice to eat or not. \
27: Ah, my brothers, all of you! When [we live] in loving harmony--even if  someone once disregarded advice--we must help one another! We mustn't squabble with each other like this. By helping each other in the proper way--er, by doing this--we will earn our food and drink and will not be inferior to others. And if we can [also] clothe and garb
\fs20 \super 19
\fs24 \nosupersub  ourselves like the others, the Lahu community
\fs20 \super 20
\fs24 \nosupersub  will prosper.
\fs20 \super 21
\fs24 \nosupersub  On the other hand,
\fs20 \super 22
\fs24 \nosupersub  if we don't act [properly] this way, when one person gets in trouble, others will suffer for it.
\fs20 \super 23
\fs24 \nosupersub \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Well, the fields--er, has everybody finished reburning his field by now? If you've finished, say no so!
\fs20 \super 24
\fs24 \nosupersub \
28: Oh, it's all finished--mine, that is.\
29: Well, if you're really finished, it's time now to plant the rice! Have you all tried planting [your] rice yet?\
30: Well, I've only managed to begin trying to plant a little so far. This week I'll get to begin trying to do more and more.
\fs20 \super 25
\fs24 \nosupersub \
31: Well then, Jali, how many acres
\fs20 \super 26
\fs24 \nosupersub  have you finished [planting] already? \
32: Oh, I've still only finished one acre. I've only managed to plant one acre so far\'85.
\fs20 \super 27
\fs24 \nosupersub \
33: One acre, eh.\
34: \{Your plans now-- / What you've been planning--\} how many acres have you been thinking of planting?\
35: According to my plans, I've been thinking of planting five acres.
\fs20 \super 28
\fs24 \nosupersub \
36: Five acres. \
37: Hm-hm.\
38: Yeah, if you do that you'll certainly earn your food and drink and won't be \{inferior to others / less well-off than anyone else\}. \
39: Well, Kheh-ki, how many acres will \ul you\ulnone  plant? \
40: Well, I've been thinking of planting five or six acres, too. I'll simply try to do as much as I can. I'm just beginning to work on it now--and the time still isn't too late\'85.
\fs20 \super 29
\fs24 \nosupersub \
41: Right. Go to it! Well, then, Sexton
\fs20 \super 30
\fs24 \nosupersub , how many acres will \ul you\ulnone  plant? \
42: Oh, I think I'll plant 
\i ten
\i0  acres! \
43: Wow!\
44: But at this point, all I've gotten done is to make a field-hut.
\fs20 \super 31
\fs24 \nosupersub \
45: Well, do your best! As our forefathers used to say:\
Slow to till and toil--rats!\
Slow to drive away--rats!\
Slaves and thralls of others!\
If you're slow to till and toil:\
Rat food, bird food.
\fs20 \super 32
\fs24 \nosupersub \
Everybody ought to hurry up and reburn his land properly, and cultivate it. \
46: I haven't even finished my reburning yet!\
47: Tomorrow--for sure
\fs20 \super 33
\fs24 \nosupersub , I'm planning to go way off over there, to the place where they say some people smeared hot peppers on a [man's] prick long ago,
\fs20 \super 34
\fs24 \nosupersub  to scoop out a honeycomb to lick. \
48: Oh, I'm going to! As far as honey-scooping goes, I've seen a [bees']-hollow \{too / myself\}. Over there above the river-bed on Porcupine Mountain.
\fs20 \super 35
\fs24 \nosupersub  Say, let's go together, shall we? \
49: Yeah, we can certainly go together. \
50: Early tomorrow morning when it's time to go you just call me, too, okay? The two of us will go off together at the crack of dawn.
\fs20 \super 36
\fs24 \nosupersub  I've seen a [bees']-hollow myself.\
51: Okay, [but] don't do to me what somebody else did that time.
\fs20 \super 37
\fs24 \nosupersub \
52: If I [say I'll] go, I'll go. Don't talk nonsense to me. \
53: Let's go together, happily and with good cheers! \
54: Because we two have never yet broken a promise. Whenever anybody discusses something and decides on it, we just have a go at it.
\fs20 \super 38
\fs24 \nosupersub  We'll go early tomorrow morning. \
55: Right, we've never broken [a promise] in the past.\
56: Say, let's take the dogs along, too! Pastor! Kheh-ki! Jali! We'll go shoot ourselves some macaques
\fs20 \super 39
\fs24 \nosupersub  and little gibbons.
\fs20 \super 40
\fs24 \nosupersub  We'll go bag ourselves all kinds of porcupines
\fs20 \super 41
\fs24 \nosupersub !\
57: Well, then, Jali, you can bring your dog along!\
58: Yeah, sure I can take mine along. [But] he can't hunt monkeys, you know!\
59: I bet he can hunt barking-deer, though. Even if he can't hunt monkeys. \
60: Sure he can hunt, sure he can hunt barking-deer.\
61: So, that's how we'll go then!\
62: Well, as far as deer are concerned--er, I mean, if you just shout and make noise at the hunting-grounds,
\fs20 \super 42
\fs24 \nosupersub  even if the dogs \{don't know how to / can't\} give chase, those monkeys will come out [all by themselves]. But as far as barking deer are concerned, if the dogs don't chase them, they won't come out. At the hunting-grounds we'll chase them and beat them and get them, we'll chase them and shoot them and get them! We'll sneak up on them and shoot them. \
63: This is the time when we've already gone and secured places to grow our crops, and managed to plant our rice--we've been able to finish the planting--and so we just go and hunt, hunt, hunt [for game] to ear, and earn our living in joy and gladness. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 64: Well, Sexton, they say some wild boars have eaten your paddy, is that right? \
65: Yes.\
[TAPE II, Side 1]\
66: Well, since wild boars have eaten rice from the Sexton's field,  tomorrow we've got to help hunt them down and beat them [dead] for him, right?\
67: Yeah, you've got to help me hunt them down and beat them [dead]. The rice itself is very good [this year in my field]. \
68: Otherwise you won't have anything to eat. If 
\i they
\i0  eat it all up.\
69: Whether we catch them or not, let's go drive them away for him. If we drive them away, they won't come back for a while, at least.
\fs20 \super 43
\fs24 \nosupersub  We'll just go and drive them away for him. Whether or not we catch them we'll go give them a chase. Tomorrow we'll go\'85. \
70: Right\'85. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Well, now the time has come for harvesting our rice!\
71: Yep, rice-harvest time has come. Tomorrow I plan to go start trying to reap. Since the wild pigs are eating away at it. \
72: Kheh-ki, have you managed to try harvesting yet? \
73: Yes, I plan to try to harvest. My field has just begun to ripen a little, too, now. Tomorrow I'll go reap,
\fs20 \super 44
\fs24 \nosupersub  I guess. \
74: Jali, what about you?\
75: Well, mine is being harvested.
\fs20 \super 44
\fs24 \nosupersub  Even today.\
76: I see. Well, how many bushels
\fs20 \super 45
\fs24 \nosupersub  have you gotten this year--I mean \ul you\ulnone ?
\fs20 \super 46
\fs24 \nosupersub \
77: Five bushels.\
78: Five bushels, eh.\
79: Uh-huh.\
80: Five bushels probably isn't enough to live on.\
81: It doesn't even come to five bushels, unfortunately.
\fs20 \super 47
\fs24 \nosupersub  In my field this year the paddy is no good, since they set the damn thing on fire for me, so I'll really only get 
\i three
\i0  bushels, Pastor. I have no idea how I'll ever be able to feed myself now. \
82: Ah, you can't think your way out [of a situation like this]!
\fs20 \super 48
\fs24 \nosupersub \
83: How about you, Jali?\
84: Well, I've got ten bushels, ten bushels for me.\
85: Hm, you're a little better off, then.
\fs20 \super 49
\fs24 \nosupersub  Shaw-lu [The Kalin], how many bushels did you get?\
86: At the moment, I've only got five bushels. But I haven't finished my reaping yet. \
87: I see. \
88: For my part, I've only got five bushels. Because the wild pigs were eating it, too. Half of it. \
89: Hm\'85 well\'85.\
90: And that's why we kept saying before "Work
\i  together
\i0 , work 
\i together
\i0 ! If everybody works all by himself, the rats eat it, the birds eat it, the wild pigs eat it!" It's because you don't listen to what people tell you, you guys!\
91: There's an old saying, "If you would eat, smell."
\fs20 \super 50
\fs24 \nosupersub  That is, if you're going to eat something, try smelling it first. Oh, my children!
\fs20 \super 51
\fs24 \nosupersub  Cultivating the land is also like that. If you plan to do it, you've got to think about it [first]. Furthermore, if you want to 
\i speak
\i0 , you have to think about it first, I tell you. Even if we just intend to speak, we must carefully think over [what we want to say]. When we don't listen to people's advice sometimes, and disobey, that's the reason why we have to suffer for it this way\'85. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Well, have you tried threshing your paddy already this year? \
92: Yeah, I've threshed it out
\fs20 \super 52
\fs24 \nosupersub  already.\
93: How much grain did you get?\
94: I got ten baskets
\fs20 \super 53
\fs24 \nosupersub  per bushel [of paddy].\
95: If you really get ten baskets per bushel from your field, that's not bad at all. Since you've gotten five bushels. From mine I only
\fs20 \super 54
\fs24 \nosupersub  get six baskets or [sometimes] as much as seven. Sometimes I only get two basketsful, or one and a half! \
96: Jali, what about yours?\
97: Well, mine now, sometimes I get ten basketsful and sometimes fifteen. \
98: I see. Well, [now] I'll teach you children one \{point / thing\}! Let everybody carry back his grain and \{put / store\} it inside his house! In this country the Thais are very mean, and they're apt to set it on fire. If the Thais burn it up, we'll have nothing to eat.\
99: No matter how much of it there is, even if I have to spend all day tomorrow carrying mine, I'll probably get [the job] finished. I'll carry it home and store it, all of it. It's [a] hard [thing] to go and do. However, since these Thais are such irrational people
\fs20 \super 55
\fs24 \nosupersub \'85.\
100: Will everybody carry it back to store?\
101: They'll carry it back to store [if they know what's good for them]. What [this fellow]
\fs20 \super 56
\b\fs24 \nosupersub  
\b0 carried back came to ten basketsful. But all together [his crop] had come to fifteen baskets. So that there were still five basketsful [lying around in the fields]. And since you people don't listen to your elders' advice, some elephants came and trampled [the rest]!\
102: Ah, me! That's why we said on that day long ago: "When people instruct you, listen to what they say! Listen to what they say! When you cultivate the land, work where the others are working,"
\fs20 \super 57
\fs24 \nosupersub  we said. But today even the elephants have again trampled [on somebody's crop]! That's no way to earn a living! When people instruct you, you don't heed their words. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * * \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 103: Has everybody finished carrying his grain back to store in his own hearth and home
\fs20 \super 58
\fs24 \nosupersub ?\
104: Well, I haven't managed to store mine yet. This weekend I plan to have some Thais carry the rice [to my home] [on their shoulders].
\fs20 \super 59
\fs24 \nosupersub \
105: Yes, do [have them] carry it all up and store it away! Immediately.\
106: Well, I'm finished already.. Because mine didn't amount to very much. [But] I've thought it over, and next year, after we've celebrated New Year's, when it's time to work again, from then on I'll work together [with the others].\
107: Okay.\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. hwei-c\'e0-t\'e1i (
\f1 = No. Thai.). The origin of this name is unknown to me, but can easily be guessed at. \
2. A rocky area near the village, also called by the Thai ph
\f0\fs26 \uc0\u462 a-d\u603 \u603 y 'Red wall.' \'f4 \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  'over there'--i.e., 'off to the side,' as distinct from m\'f4 \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  'down below.'
\fs24 \
3. 'human beings' rather than 'people' is intended to convey the sense of ch\uc0\u596  q\'f4\u660  ve l\u603 \u768  "as for people" (cf. Jse. 
\f2 \'ec\'d1
\fs20 \'da\'a6 \ul Japanes phrase\ulnone ).
\f0\fs24 \
4. <m\'e2 m\'e2 m\'e2 \uc0\u103 \u776 \u616 \u768 > elab. "not many not numerous."\
5. <n\'e0 la g\uc0\u596 \u768  la> elab. "become sick become wretched."\
6. Proverb: \'f3-q\ul \ulc0 o\ulnone  h\'e1-p\uc0\u616  k\u601  \ul a\ulnone  ve m\'e2 h\'ea\uc0\u660  "One shouldn't act stupidly." The 'you know' renders the Pvnf l\u603  'since, became.'\
7. t\'ea p\uc0\u596 \u770 \u660  t\'ed 'all together': lit. "at the same time."\
8. \'9au l\uc0\u596  \'9au t\'f9 te ve: "to do so as to be in the same situation as others." This phrase is often used to express the ambition of the Lahu as a people to become as well off as other groups. Another phrase for the same concept is \u616 -la-mu-la t\'f9 te ve, "to do so as to become big and high"--i.e., to make progress in the world's eyes. \
9. h\uc0\u603  the ve 'to clear away the trees from a new field-site'" one of the first steps in the Lahu agricultural cycle. \
10. See fn. 4. The 'you know' is intended to connivery the sense of the Pvf ve-\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone .\
11. <hal\uc0\u603 \u768 -haqa>. \
12. <h\ul a\ulnone -h\ul a\ulnone  p\uc0\u603 \u769 -p\u603 \u769 >.\
13. <\uc0\u596 \u768 
\f1 -m\ul o\ulnone  \uc0\u596 \u768 -c\'fa>.\
14. h\uc0\u603 -\u103 \u776 \u596 \u770  ph\u596 \u770  c\'e2 ve: h\u603 -\u103 \u776 \u596 \u770  'field-bones' - a field that has already yielded a crop of the year before. ph\u596 \u770  ve 'to hack clear the undergrowth with a long sword.' The heavier work, h\u603  the ve (fn.9), is of course not necessary in the case of an 'oldfield.'\
15. As a joke or through carelessness. This greatly complicated the timing of the various slash-and-burn operations.\
16. h\uc0\u603  ji ve. The reburying - over of the field to consume the material left over from the first burning (h\u603  t\'fa ve).\
17. The particle l\'f2 'contrary to fact,' which appears three times in this passage, is a loan form Shan, and is not otherwise attested in my texts. \
18. qh\'e0-qhe c\uc0\u603  \u103 \u776 a chi qhe c\u603  V: 'to V as much as possible.'\
19. <\uc0\u103 \u776 a v\u616 \u768 \u660  \u103 \u776 a d\u603 >.\
20. L\'e2h\ul u\ulnone  t\'ea y\uc0\u603 \u768  "the Lahu house."\
21. p\uc0\u596 -\'9aa la 'come to be well-off [lit. "easy-born"].'\
22. chi th\'e0\uc0\u660  pat\u596  means 'for this reason,' but clearly the opposite meaning is intended.\
23. Lit. 'when one person is in trouble, it is the same as the second person being in trouble.'\
24. Lit. 'if [you've] finished, say "finished".'\
25. Two splendid multiversatile concatenations in successive sentences! \uc0\u103 \u776 a \ul ta\ulnone  ti a-ni 'manage to begin trying to plant'; \uc0\u103 \u776 a \ul ta\ulnone  te qai a-ni 'get to begin trying to do more and more.' \
26. t\'fb 'the area one can sow with the seeds from one basket.'\
27. The suspension marks '\'85' translate the Pvnf l\uc0\u603 .\
28. Lahu citative constructions are often both introduced and ended by the same citation marker: cf. y\uc0\u596 \u770  q\'f4\u660  ve "X" chi qhe q\'f4\u660  ve y\'f2 Lit., "what he said was: "X", he said." A less literal and more literate translation of this sentence would be simply "what I've been planning is to plant five acres."\
29. See fn. 27.\
30. P\'f9-c\uc0\u596 \u770  < Shan "church-person." The individual so called had the job of looking after the physical appearance of the hut used as a church by the village. \
31. A hut erected in the fields. During periods of intense work in the fields, the cultivator cooks, eats, and sleeps in his field-hut for days on end without returning to the village. \
32. A good example of an old poetic form: five lines, the first four with 6 syllables and the last with 4. A prose paraphrase follows: "If you're slow in tilling your land, the rodents (rats, porcupines, squirrels, etc.) will ruin it for you; if you're slow about driving the animals off your land, the rodents will ruin you. You will become the slaves of others. If you're slow in your tilling, your land (and you) will become food for the rats and the birds."\
33. The 'for sure' renders qo \ul \ulc0 q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 \ulnone , more emphatic than plain qo.\
34. The incident in question involved a group of mischievous boys who played the trick on a man as he lay sleeping in the shade. \
35. f\'e2\uc0\u660 -p\u603 \u769  qh\u596 . f\'e2\u660 -p\u603 \u769  is the 'brush-tailed porcupine,' a large species that lives among the rocks.\
36. t\'ea n\'e0\uc0\u660  \'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768  te l\u603 : t\'ea n\'e0\uc0\u660  'early morning' + \'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768  (~ \'9a\'e1i) 'intensitive.' \
37. That is, on a previous occasion somebody had made a similar arrangement with him, but ended up by not keeping the appointment. \
38. qai ni ve 'have a try at going; go and see what happens.' Lit: "To the extent that anybody discusses and decides, we just go and see."\
39. m\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 -n\'ed-qwe 'the Rhesus 
\i macaque
\i0 .' \
40. m\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 -n\'e2\u660  'the white-handed gibbon' _____.\
41. <f\'e2\uc0\u660 -bu f\'e2\u660 -p\u603 \u769 > 'all kinds of porcupines' f\'e2\u660 -bu 'the Asiatic p.' ____; f\'e2\u660 -p\u603 \u769  see above fn. 35.\
42. <\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e0\u660 -m\'fb-\u103 \u776 \'e0\u660 -k\u616 \u768 > lit., "hunting-skies-hunting-place."\
43. \uc0\u596 \u768 -h\'f3-\u109 \u769  \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone . A hapax legomenon in our data. \
44. 
\f2 g\uc0\u776 
\f3 \uc0\u616 \u768 \u660 
\f2  qai 
\f1 'go and reap'; but in #75 
\f2 g\uc0\u776 
\f3 \uc0\u616 \u768 \u660 
\f2  qai 
\f1 means 'is being reaped, is reaping, continues to (be) reap(ed).' The V\sub v\nosupersub  qai means either 'go and V\sub h\nosupersub ' or 'continue to V\sub h\nosupersub .'  \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 45. p\'f9: _________________.\
46. n\uc0\u596 \u768  \'e0\u660  \u42890  n\u596 \u768  th\'e0
\b \uc0\u660 
\b0  Pn 'you (acc.).' I.e., "it's you I'm asking (not Jali)"\
47. \'9a\ul \ulc0 e\ulnone  P\sub v\nosupersub  of regret. \
48. d\uc0\u596 \u770  m\'e2 t\u596 \u770 \u660 : lit., "think not come out"\
49. The P\sub v\nosupersub  \'9a\ul \ulc0 \uc0\u596 \ulnone  'still' conveys the nuance 'you're still in the realm of comfortable living.'\
50. I.e., "Look before you leap." \
51. The Pastor lapses into sermon-style at this point. \
52. It is misleading (and boring) invariably to translate the V\sub v \nosupersub (a-)ni by 'try to V\sub h\nosupersub .' It sometimes serves merely to 'round out' the 
\b V
\b0  ('have a go at V'\sub h\nosupersub  ing'), and is best left untranslated. \
53. 
\f2 p
\f3 \'ee\uc0\u660 
\f2 .
\f1 \
54. The P\sub n \nosupersub \uc0\u603 \u768 , used with Num+cef sometimes simply serves to 'round off' the quantity expression (much like the Thai s\'e1g v or the Japanese gurai and need not be translated). Sometimes however it retains its original nuance of 'only.'\
55. ch\uc0\u596  kh\u596 \u770  \'9a\ul \ulc0 i\ulnone  ve m\'e2 h\'ea\uc0\u660 . lit, "they don't understand human words."\
56. The victim of the incident to be recounted never appears as the overt subject of a sentence. \
57. "wherever the others work, work there ("here") [too]."\
58. <\'e1-qh\uc0\u596 -y\u603 \u768 -qh\u596 >\
59. The Lahu carry things on their backs or heads (p\'fb ve). The Thai prefer to carry baskets by attaching them to shoulder-poles (t\'e2\uc0\u660  ve).\
\
\
\

\f0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
}