{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f2\fnil\fcharset129 AppleGothic;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f4\fnil\fcharset0 CharisSIL;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 10 Agriculture and the Need for Unity
\b0 \
[TAPE II, Side 1]\
66: Well, since wild boars have eaten rice from the Sexton's field,  tomorrow we've got to help hunt them down and beat them [dead] for him, right?\
67: Yeah, you've got to help me hunt them down and beat them [dead]. The rice itself is very good [this year in my field]. \
68: Otherwise you won't have anything to eat. If 
\i they
\i0  eat it all up.\
69: Whether we catch them or not, let's go drive them away for him. If we drive them away, they won't come back for a while, at least.[43]
 We'll just go and drive them away for him. Whether or not we catch them we'll go give them a chase. Tomorrow we'll go\'85. \
70: Right\'85. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Well, now the time has come for harvesting our rice!\
71: Yep, rice-harvest time has come. Tomorrow I plan to go start trying to reap. Since the wild pigs are eating away at it. \
72: Kheh-ki, have you managed to try harvesting yet? \
73: Yes, I plan to try to harvest. My field has just begun to ripen a little, too, now. Tomorrow I'll go reap,[44]
 I guess. \
74: Jali, what about you?\
75: Well, mine is being harvested.[44]
 Even today.\
76: I see. Well, how many bushels[45]
 have you gotten this year--I mean \ul you\ulnone ?[46]\
77: Five bushels.\
78: Five bushels, eh.\
79: Uh-huh.\
80: Five bushels probably isn't enough to live on.\
81: It doesn't even come to five bushels, unfortunately.[47]
 In my field this year the paddy is no good, since they set the damn thing on fire for me, so I'll really only get 
\i three
\i0  bushels, Pastor. I have no idea how I'll ever be able to feed myself now. \
82: Ah, you can't think your way out [of a situation like this]![48]\
83: How about you, Jali?\
84: Well, I've got ten bushels, ten bushels for me.\
85: Hm, you're a little better off, then.[49]
 Shaw-lu [The Kalin], how many bushels did you get?\
86: At the moment, I've only got five bushels. But I haven't finished my reaping yet. \
87: I see. \
88: For my part, I've only got five bushels. Because the wild pigs were eating it, too. Half of it. \
89: Hm\'85 well\'85.\
90: And that's why we kept saying before "Work
\i  together
\i0 , work 
\i together
\i0 ! If everybody works all by himself, the rats eat it, the birds eat it, the wild pigs eat it!" It's because you don't listen to what people tell you, you guys!\
91: There's an old saying, "If you would eat, smell."[50]
 That is, if you're going to eat something, try smelling it first. Oh, my children![51]
 Cultivating the land is also like that. If you plan to do it, you've got to think about it [first]. Furthermore, if you want to 
\i speak
\i0 , you have to think about it first, I tell you. Even if we just intend to speak, we must carefully think over [what we want to say]. When we don't listen to people's advice sometimes, and disobey, that's the reason why we have to suffer for it this way\'85. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Well, have you tried threshing your paddy already this year? \
92: Yeah, I've threshed it out[52]
 already.\
93: How much grain did you get?\
94: I got ten baskets[53]
 per bushel [of paddy].\
95: If you really get ten baskets per bushel from your field, that's not bad at all. Since you've gotten five bushels. From mine I only[54]
 get six baskets or [sometimes] as much as seven. Sometimes I only get two basketsful, or one and a half! \
96: Jali, what about yours?\
97: Well, mine now, sometimes I get ten basketsful and sometimes fifteen. \
98: I see. Well, [now] I'll teach you children one \{point / thing\}! Let everybody carry back his grain and \{put / store\} it inside his house! In this country the Thais are very mean, and they're apt to set it on fire. If the Thais burn it up, we'll have nothing to eat.\
99: No matter how much of it there is, even if I have to spend all day tomorrow carrying mine, I'll probably get [the job] finished. I'll carry it home and store it, all of it. It's [a] hard [thing] to go and do. However, since these Thais are such irrational people[55]\'85.\
100: Will everybody carry it back to store?\
101: They'll carry it back to store [if they know what's good for them]. What [this fellow][56]\b\fs24 \nosupersub  
\b0 carried back came to ten basketsful. But all together [his crop] had come to fifteen baskets. So that there were still five basketsful [lying around in the fields]. And since you people don't listen to your elders' advice, some elephants came and trampled [the rest]!\
102: Ah, me! That's why we said on that day long ago: "When people instruct you, listen to what they say! Listen to what they say! When you cultivate the land, work where the others are working,"[57]
 we said. But today even the elephants have again trampled [on somebody's crop]! That's no way to earn a living! When people instruct you, you don't heed their words. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 * * * \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 103: Has everybody finished carrying his grain back to store in his own hearth and home[58]
?\
104: Well, I haven't managed to store mine yet. This weekend I plan to have some Thais carry the rice [to my home] [on their shoulders].[59]\
105: Yes, do [have them] carry it all up and store it away! Immediately.\
106: Well, I'm finished already.. Because mine didn't amount to very much. [But] I've thought it over, and next year, after we've celebrated New Year's, when it's time to work again, from then on I'll work together [with the others].\
107: Okay.\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 43. \uc0\u596 \u768 -h\'f3-\u109 \u769  \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone . A hapax legomenon in our data. \
44. 
\f2 g\uc0\u776 
\f3 \uc0\u616 \u768 \u660 
\f2  qai 
\f1 'go and reap'; but in #75 
\f2 g\uc0\u776 
\f3 \uc0\u616 \u768 \u660 
\f2  qai 
\f1 means 'is being reaped, is reaping, continues to (be) reap(ed).' The V@v@ qai means either 'go and V@h@' or 'continue to V@h@.'  \
45. p\'f9: _________________.\
46. n\uc0\u596 \u768  \'e0\u660  
\f4 \uc0\u42890 
\f1  n\uc0\u596 \u768  th\'e0
\b \uc0\u660 
\b0  Pn 'you (acc.).' I.e., "it's you I'm asking (not Jali)"\
47. \'9a\ul e\ulnone  P@v@ of regret. \
48. d\uc0\u596 \u770  m\'e2 t\u596 \u770 \u660 : lit., "think not come out"\
49. The P@v@ \'9a\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  'still' conveys the nuance 'you're still in the realm of comfortable living.'\
50. I.e., "Look before you leap." \
51. The Pastor lapses into sermon-style at this point. \
52. It is misleading (and boring) invariably to translate the V@v @(a-)ni by 'try to V@h@.' It sometimes serves merely to 'round out' the 
\b V
\b0  ('have a go at V'@h@ ing'), and is best left untranslated. \
53. 
\f2 p
\f3 \'ee\uc0\u660 
\f2 .
\f1 \
54. The P@n@ \uc0\u603 \u768 , used with Num+cef sometimes simply serves to 'round off' the quantity expression (much like the Thai s\'e1g v or the Japanese gurai and need not be translated). Sometimes however it retains its original nuance of 'only.'\
55. ch\uc0\u596  kh\u596 \u770  \'9a\ul i\ulnone  ve m\'e2 h\'ea\uc0\u660 . lit, "they don't understand human words."\
56. The victim of the incident to be recounted never appears as the overt subject of a sentence. \
57. "wherever the others work, work there ("here") [too]."\
58. <\'e1-qh\uc0\u596 -y\u603 \u768 -qh\u596 >\
59. The Lahu carry things on their backs or heads (p\'fb ve). The Thai prefer to carry baskets by attaching them to shoulder-poles (t\'e2\uc0\u660  ve).}
