{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 12 Sermon: The Widow's Mites\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 [Tape II, Side 1 #3 and 5]\
	1 Let us reflect together on the story of a group of rich men who made offerings to God and of a certain widow who offered money to God. 2 This story which I would like to impart to you, my brothers, is to be found in Mark 12:41-44.
\fs18 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  3 A second passage is to be found in Luke 6:38.
\fs18 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  4 And a third passage is contained in II Corinthians 9:6-7.
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  \
	5 This book of the Bible
\fs18 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub  has many \{places / passages\} which are full of meaning.
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub  6 Therefore, please listen carefully to this story about offering money to God in the temple. \
	7 When Jesus was living on the earth, there was a certain very poor widow in the city of Jerusalem. 8 Her husband had died long before. 9 She had to seek her own living, and though she did her utmost, [her] money was never enough to gain her food and drink [or] to clothe and garb herself, so she would go hungry and suffer. \
	10 This woman, despite the fact that she was so wretched, had not forgotten God. She would go up to the temple
\fs18 \super 6
\fs24 \nosupersub  as was fitting,
\fs18 \super 7
\fs24 \nosupersub  and not only did she praise Him, but every day she would pray
\fs18 \super 8
\fs24 \nosupersub  fervently
\fs18 \super 7
\fs24 \nosupersub  to God. \
	11 "One day this widow went to the great Temple to contribute and donate an offering of money. 12 For her offering she gave a great deal of money--er, rather, she 
\i could not
\i0  give a great deal of money, but she took all the money she did have and went to offer it--went to offer it to Him. 13 When she prayed--er, when she arrived at the Temple, she saw a group of rich men
\fs18 \super 9
\fs24 \nosupersub  putting great sums of money into the offering-box, and her heart was downcast. 14 She wanted to offer lots of money just like them, but she didn't have anything to give. 15 She only had two small coins.
\fs18 \super 10
\fs24 \nosupersub  16 Those two small coins were only worth a farthing a piece.
\fs18 \super 11
\fs24 \nosupersub  \
	17 When the woman put the two small coins in the offering-box--into the offering-box--Jesus saw it. 18 He also saw the group of rich men offering great sums of money. 19 Then he said to his disciples: 20 "More than all the people who have put [money] into the offering-place--er, into the offering-box--this poor and wretched widow has put the most of all." \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Footnotes
\b0 \
1. Lit: "Mark big-number 12, small-number 41 \{to / and\} 44." The passage, in the King James Version and in Lewis' Lahu translation, runs as follows (The Lahu is in our transcription): \
	41: And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much.\
	42: And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a far-thing. \
	43: And he called
\i  unto him
\i0  his disciples, and saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury: \
	44: For all 
\i they
\i0  did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, 
\i even
\i0  all her living. \
2. 38: Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye withal it shall be measured to you again. \
3. 6: But this I 
\i say
\i0 , He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully. \
	7: Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, 
\i so let him give
\i0 ; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver. \
4. I.e., 
\i Mark
\i0 . \
5. c\uc0\u616 \u769 -k\u616 \u768  lit: 'sticking place': meaning, interest, value, worth. \
6. bo-y\uc0\u603 \u768  lit: "grace-house": 'church, synagogue, temple.' Used for any place of (non-animistic) worship. bo-y\u603 \u768  t\'e2\u660  ve lit: "go up to church": 'go to church.'\
7. qha-d\uc0\u603 \u768 \u660  An all-purpose adverbial expression signifying 'action performed in the approved manner': "nicely, properly, as is fitting, very well, fervently, etc."\
8. bo l\uc0\u596 \u768  ve lit: "beg for grace": 'pray'\
9. p\uc0\u596 -\'9aa-p\ul a\ulnone  lit: "those who give birth easily." cf. the English "well-born."\
10. p\uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 -\'9a\ul a\ulnone -\uc0\u603 \u769  < 
\b BS. y \uc0\u109 \u769  io
\b0  'money.'\
11. t\'ea p\uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 . A p\u603 \u768 \u660  is 1/100 of a Burmese rupee (BS. py\'e2).}