{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12740\viewh19500\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 17 Sprits that Bite and Those that Don't
\b0 \
[Tape II, Side 1 #8]\
1. This spirit, you see, when this master-spirit is hungry for meat, he takes a pitchfork [1] and hooks it fast onto a human being, [so that] if he [=the human] doesn't feed him tasty food, he will fiercely make the human being waste away.\
2. But if the man goes to consult the spirit-doctor [3] the doctor [will say]:\
3. "The reason why your body has become so thin is, that the sky-spirit wanted to eat delicious food through you, so he has treated you this way. \
4. "However, if you cook up some good-tasting food and feed it to him, you will be cured. \
5. "If you don't feed him, that pitchfork will stay hooked onto you. \
6. But [4] as soon as you do feed him, he'll take it all away, and your body will be healthy [again]."\
7. This kind of spirit can also start to cause trouble [5] for the whole household. \
8. However, as far as the kind [of spirit] that cannot bite goes, we simply pay homage to \
them, mark you! [6] \
9. We do not worship the kind that can bite. \
10. If we were to speak about what forms [7] the biting kind of spirits have, seeing as how there are so many of them, since they are everywhere--water-spirits, rock-spirits, mountain-spirits, valley-spirits, tree-spirits, thunder-and-lightning-spirits--there are all kinds of spirits.\
11. But even though there is such a large number of them, this kind of spirits that can bite are all inferior to us human beings. \
12. This is the way the matter stands.  \
\

\b Footnotes \

\b0 [1] \'9ao q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  l\u603 \u768 \u660  ve: lit. "a crooked piece of iron." l\u603 \u768 \u660  ~
\f1  
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660  'adverbializer'
\f1 .  See the 
\i Index Verborum
\i0  in GL:647.\
[2] c
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f1  c
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f1  ve 'cause to be thin.'\
[3] m
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f1 -p\ul a\ulnone : a "ritual specialist" in animist villages, often an opium addict, who is recognized as an authority in dealing with the spirits by reciting the appropriate incantations. See the many such texts recorded by A.R. Walker (partial bibliography in DL:1421-25). \
[4] This speaker uses y\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1 -qh\'e2(-k\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1 ) 'but; however' to the exclusion of all other conjunctions. It is left untranslated occasionally, where its iteration would be tedious in English. \
[5] ch\'e8
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1 : lit. "bite". \
[6] n\'ea te ve 'to worship the spirits.'  q
\f2 \'f4\uc0\u660 
\f1 -p
\f2 \'ee
\f1 -
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1  is a final unrestricted particle meaning literally "tell it to third persons!", here translated 'mark you'.\
[7] 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f1 -to: lit. "bodies" (< Shan).\
\
}