{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 20 How We Came from Burma
\b0 \
[Tape II, Side 1 #11]\
1 [When we were] fleeing here to Thailand [from where]
1
 we [used to] live in Burma, when we were fleeing here along the roads and byways,
2
 we lived off jungle-greens
3
 and by damming [streams] for fish as we came--that's how we made it here. 2 And there was a big flock of kids along, too--er, walking along--. 3 And we had to stay on the road a very long time, too. 4 But
4
 getting here--uh, when it had gotten to be over a month, we had come as far as Thayakwei,
5
 where we made camp.
6
 5 Looking for banana-leaves
6
 to live off and damming forks in streams, that's how we got here. 6 We made it to Thailand.\
[7 (whisper) Think carefully before you speak!]
7
\
	8 Fleeing here from Burma we [crossed] the Nam-Si?
8
 over to this side. 9 The time we stayed at Thayakwei was about two months--we were there for two months. 10 When we were there--\
[11 (whisper) Don't laugh!]
9
\
	12 --we were all suffering from hunger and cold. 13 We would go and eat the other Lahu's mustard-greens.
10
 14 We'd go and eat their rice. 15 We were at Thayakwei for two months. 16 We would chop down Kitty-cane
11
 to eat. 18 We'd go eat banana-\{stems / plants\}. 19 We'd dam for fish to eat. 20 We came here begging and escaping for our food.
12
\
	21 After staying there for a long time
13 
we continued on to Shajieh.
14 
22 When we arrived at Shajieh we and the Chinese--er, all he Chinese welcomed us gladly and cheerfully, and set down cups of hot water
15
 for us to drink. 23 And they fed everybody rice, too. 24 After we ate we took to the road
16
 again, until we got to the village of Po-mu
17
 \{up / over\} there, where we stayed and spent the night, and we Lahu traded all sorts of things with them for food.
18
 25 We traded away our silver buttons,
19
 and even our bracelets we traded away to fill our bellies.
20
 26 We had nothing [left]. 27 In poverty and distress we were begging and screaming for our food.\
	28 Then
22
 our brethren who were [already] living here in Huey Tad
21
 came to lead us here. 29 They came for us. 30 THey came to lead us here and they took care of us joyfully and gladly, and so we arrived here at Huey Tad. \
	31 Having to flee here was a very distressing time for us.
23
 32 On the midst of our trouble we had been separated from one another.
24
 33 So inasmuch
25
 as we have [finally], by the grace of God, managed to see each other again, we now have great and abundant reason to praise God. \
	34 That's all there is [to say].\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. The directional idea 'from' is seldom expressed overtly in Lahu. The 'place from which' is usually mentioned without any directional particle, followed immediately by the 'place to' plus locative particle. See grammar _____.\
2. A quasi-elab <y\'e0\uc0\u660 -q\u596 -h\'e1-q\'e1>. Apparently a set expression, though neither the 1st and 3rd nor the 2nd and 4th elements are identical. h\'e1 is probably to be identified with the verb 'to spend the night.'\
3. ph\'f2\uc0\u660 -tu: 'pith-root'\
4. This sentence begins with the P@vnf@ k\'e0\uc0\u660 , something which sentences are not supposed to do. If this is not an error, k\'e0\u660  is either being used elliptically for c\'f2 k\'e0\u660  'here,' or as a conjunction = y\'e0\u660 -qh\'e2 k\'e0\u660  'however.'\
5. Apparently a (Lahu?) village just across the Thai frontier from Burma. [CHECK]\
6. LSZ.\
7. A hissed reprimand by a friend of the speaker. The beginning of the account is indeed somewhat diffuse. \
8. FIND THAI NAME & LOCATION OF THIS RIVER.\
9. The speaker is a giggly young woman.\
10. L\'e2h\ul u \ulnone g\uc0\u603  \'9au \u103 \u776 \u596 \u770 -c\'e1: lit. "at the Lahu-others' mustard-greens." Better phrasing would be \'9au L\'e2h\ul u\ulnone  g\uc0\u603 . They were reduced to living off the Lahu who were already settled in that part of Thailand.\
11. CHECK. m\uc0\u603 \u769 -ni-g\u596 \u770  "cat-rattan," a small sticky kind of rattan only marginally edible at best. \
12. <l\uc0\u596 \u768 -l\u603 \u768 \u660 -l\u596 \u768 -c\'e2> lit. "beg-to lick-beg-to eat."\
13. t\'e2-v\'e2: < Shan lit. "all day long." Here used imprecisely to mean 'for a long time.'\
14. At Chinese village. TRY TO LOCATE.\
15. \uc0\u103 \u776 \u616 \u768 -h\u596  "hot water." The Lahu word for light-colored Chinese tea. The strong dark-orange variety that the Lahu themselves habitually drink is called l\'e0-\u103 \u776 \u616 \u768 . \
16. q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  ph\u596  la ve: lit. 'again came fleeing.'\
17. Near the town of Farng, about 115 km north of Chiengmai. (WHO ARE THE INHABITANTS?)\
18. pa c\'e2 ve: '\{eat by trading / trade for food\}.' Lit, "(they) engaged in trading--for--food all sorts of things with us Lahu."\
19. A traditional Black Lahu women's costume has some 500 silver buttons sewn on it. \
20. 'Fill our bellies' translates l\uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 , lit. 'to lick,' more earthly than c\'e2 in the sense of 'eat.' \
21. An advance party of Lahu had already settled in Huey Tad. When they got established they sent for their relatives and friends still in Burma. \
22. The five occurrences of the word q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  as V@h@ or \ul V\ulnone V in sentences 28-30 merely serve as 'narrative-continuation \{lubricators / markers\}, indicating that the various events took place in an ordered sequence (and giving the speaker extra instants to think). \
23. Lit: "The time that we had to flee here was very troublesome."\
24. Lit: "one person hadn't even gotten to see the other."\
25. 'inasmuch as' is very similar morphologically to Lahu 
\b VP
\b0  + ve \uc0\u596 \u768 -qh\u596  lo, lit. "inside 
\b VP
\b0 ."\
\
\
\
}