{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\author Chundra Cathcart}}\margl1134\margr1134\margb1134\margt1134\vieww33180\viewh18700\viewkind0
\deftab709
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs40 \cf0 24
\i  Building a House:\

\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 T=Teacher (Pastor C\'e0-bo)\
H=Headman (C\'e0-b\'ed)\
\
Issue: how much to vary translation of \'e2a, which begins most of the turns.  Usually translated \'93well.\'94\
\
1. H: Well, we\'92ll build a house.\
2. T: Well, just how shall we build it, the house?\
3. H: Well, once we\'92ve collected all the materials, we can do it!\
4. T: Well, there\'92s one thing we don\'92t have enough of yet!  What we call the roof-support beams [1] aren't enough yet.\
5. H: Well, we\'92ll just go and cut [2] some. We'll take one or two people along.\
6. T: With only two people you won\'92t be able to carry them back [from the forest to the village].\
7. H: Let four people carry them, four people.\
8. T: Yeah, as long as four people carry it, they\'92ll probably succeed.\
9. H: Let everybody look for all the other stuff, all the things [we\'92ll need].  You guys should select people, and go look for everything.\
10. T: So who all will go with me\'97to go and cut some roof-support beams?\
11. H: Well, C\'e0-q
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 , you should be one to go too!  Will you go?\
12. C\'e0-q
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 : I\'92ll go.\
13. H: C\'e0-ye, please go too.\
14. C\'e0-ye: I\'92ll go.\
15. H: That makes two people, right? C\'e0-bo, are you going too?\
16. C\'e0-bo: Sure I am!\
17. H: Th\'fby\'ec, please go too.\
18. Th\'fby\'ec: OK.\
19. H: That makes four people.  That\'92s enough, right?\
20. T: If we\'92ve got four people, that\'92s enough.  Four people will carry the beams for me, and when we\'92ve succeeded [in getting them to the building site] we\'92ll just put them in place!\
21. H: Uh-huh.\
22. T: What day shall we do it on?\
23. H: I say we ought to do it on Tuesday.\
24. T: Tuesday.\
25. H: Yeah. As for food [3], what they'll feed you guys probably won't be very tasty.\
26. T: Well, there\'92s enough canned carp [4] for the whole group, as far as food goes. We Lahu we help each other!  It\'92s not that we just look at what food there is to eat!\
27. H: We should just kill one or two chickens to eat.  In that case, a great big cock and a hen, two nice fat animals, should be enough.\
28. T: Oh, two chickens and a half should be enough!\
29. H: <laughs> [5] Well, as long as they\'92re big it\'92ll be enough.\
30. T: How many people are there who would like to eat pork [6] then, among all of you house-builders?\
31. Kachin: Well, just the whole village --\
32. Somebody: Well, I\'92d like to eat it too.\
33. Somebody else: Well, as for me, I\'92ll take the pig intestines\'97I love to eat them.\
34. T: P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2\fs42 \uc0\u603 \u769  
\f0\fs40 [7] , what about you?\
35. P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2\fs42 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0\fs40 : The kidneys, the kidneys.\
36. T: The kidneys. Th\'fb-y\'ec, how about you?\
37. TY: The stomach.\
38. T: The stomach.\
39. Kachin: Unless there\'92s pig-meat it still won\'92t be enough.\
40. T: Well, I\'92d like to eat the [pig\'92s] head boiled, the head boiled.\
41. Somebody: I\'92d like to eat it too, your boiled head.\
42. Headman: I\'92d like to eat the meat chopped up fine.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 43. T: Sure, let everybody eat whatever he likes.\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 44. T: Well, then, [8] is there enough thatching-grass already, you guys who are building the house?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 45. H: Well, eighteen sheaves of thatch have arrived, it should be enough.\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 46. T: Oh, eighteen sheaves.\
47. Somebody: Mm-hm.\
48. T: If there are eighteen sheaves, that\'92ll probably be more than enough. [9]\
49. H: Try to figure it out\'97on this house, how many tiers [of thatch] will there be on one side [of the roof]?\
50. T: In olden times, the way our ancestors used to do it, on one side there were six tiers!  On the other side they used to make seven tiers.\
51. H: Thirteen tiers, right?\
52. T: They used to make thirteen tiers indeed.\
53. H: Well, if it\'92s thirteen tiers, that\'92s fine.  Not reaching in even number [on the two sides of the roof] is an advantage for us. [10]\
54. If we make six tiers on each side, that would make twelve tiers for both sides, which is an even number.\
55. T: That's not good.  Building a house you can\'92t let them reach an even number.  They say it would cause a lot of climbing up. [11] That's what our ancestors say. \
56. T: Well, we\'92ve just got to find somebody who\'92s really good at it. Yeah, somebody who\'92s the best. [12] The best one is Th\'fb-sw\'e8!  As a house-builder.\
57. H: Let's us guys go and ask him. [12]  Invite him and say "Please help us!"\
58. Kachin: Yeah, it\'92s Thu-shwe who\'92s really good at climbing up a house!\
59. H: Send somebody to fetch him, send somebody to fetch him!\
60. T: Who will go?\
61. Somebody: Let C\'e0-ye go, C\'e0-ye.\
62. Kachin: hurry up and go, hurry up and go!\
63. Boy: I\'92ll go!\
64. H: He\'92s gone, he\'92s gone!  He\'92ll be back in a minute.\
65. T: That\'97\
66. H: What is it, your \'93that\'94?\
67. T: That eggshell! <Laughter> [13]. Well then, now let's keep going. Once the house is built, we've got to install all the fireplace-props!  Have you almost installed them? Is the fireplace there already?\
68. H: Down there above the river they\'92ve cut them [14] into boards and left them. Let's go up there and carry them back here. You guys find people [to do it].\
69. T: You mean over there on the high ground near Ping River [15] ?\
70. H: Yeah.\
71. T: Oh, hell [16], that\'92s too far, where you [did it], at such a distance. Wasn't there a closer place?\
72. H: Oh, down there where the rice-mill is at that fork in the road there\'92s one [tree] already cut into boards.  I don\'92t know if it\'92s any good now! [17]\
73. T: What kind of wood is it?\
74. H: It\'92s jupi wood, jupi wood. [18]\
75. T: If it\'92s jupi wood, that\'92s fine.  Somebody go and climb up -- 		Th\'fb-\'9aw\'e8, you go climb up.  Are you going?\
76. Th\'fb-\'9aw\'e8: I\'92ll go.\
77. T: Yes, that\'92s good!\
78. Somebody: C\'e0-bo, you cook the rice and curry!  Is the food all cooked yet?\
79. Somebody else: Hey, I\'92m hungry too.  It\'92s time to eat.\
80. C\'e0-bo: It\'92s not done yet, not done yet.  It\'92s not time yet.  Just wait a while.\
81. Kachin: Hurry up and spread out the bamboo slats! [19]\
82. Somebody: And the sun is awful hot.  It\'92s time to have lunch!  Aren\'92t you hungry, you guys?\
83. T: The others have already finished with their house-posts. But you\'92re taking such a long time with yours, that I told you to work on.  I\'92ve never seen the like! [20]\
84. H: [What do you mean by saying] you've "never seen the like"!  
\i You\'92re
\i0  taking so long cooking the food.\
85. Cook: Come and eat, come and eat!  It\'92s ready, come eat!\
86. T: He says \'93Come eat\'94!  Kachin, you get to say grace.  Kachin [21], will you say grace [22]?\
87. Kachin: Aw, I can\'92t say grace properly yet.  Pastor, you do it!\
***\
88. H: Well, since we\'92ve finished eating, my boys, let's hurry up and do everything!\
89. T: Yeah, it\'92s high time we thatched the roof, it\'92s time to thatch, otherwise it\'92ll get dark!  The sky will be black!  And if it rains, we might not be able to find a place to sleep.\
90. H: Hey, hurry and drag up all the house-posts and set them upright!  Each and every one of them.\
91. Kachin: Grab all the house-posts, grab the house-posts!\
92. H: Here, here, take and stick one over there!  Put another one underneath!\
93. T: Do it properly!  These house-posts might end up in even numbers.  Don\'92t let them be paired up!  Ah, all the house-posts have been stuck into place already!  So now, take the roof-sticks and tie the thatch to them! Come on, guys, the thatch-sticks! [23]\
94. H: Take them and pass them up, pass up the thatch-sticks! [24]\
95. Somebody (on the roof): Bring the bamboo-splits [25] too!\
96. Kachin: Pass \'92em up, pass \'92em up, pass up the thatch-sticks!\
97. T: Bring the bamboo-splits! He says to take all the splits that anybody gave you! \
98. Kachin: Splits, splits, splits\'97try to find the splits!  Hurry up and bring them! \
99. Somebody: Tie [them] up quick! [26]\
100. T: O.K., then let the tie-ers tie, while the thatchers thatch!  The ones who carried [the stuff] up there to tie have already done it\'97but there are so many people here now. [27] If you just hang around, there's no point to it. It's no use at all. You're just wasting your time. [28]\
101. H: Well, the thatching is done!  On the lower part there are only five or six tiers.  Here on top re-tie it again! \
102. T: The group working up top began working this morning, before the others had started!  But still they haven\'92t finished even now!\
103. H: It\'92s almost done, almost done.  Only two tiers are left.\
104. Somebody: We already knew that bunch up top didn't work very hard.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 105. T: It\'92s not just a question of doing it fast.  Whatever you\'92re working at, don\'92t be concerned at the way others are doing it. [29]  What you 
\i are
\i0  very clever at is going to visit girls [30] all the time, going to sneak looks at them!\
106. Somebody: Oh, that\'92s not so!  It\'92s because they weren\'92t quick passing us up the thatch, they weren\'92t fast enough handing it up to us.\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 107. Somebody else: When it gets dark you say they\'92re good at sneaking around \'93other people\'92s daughters\'94!  If they\'92re made to tie lots and lots of roof-sticks. [31]\
108. T: That\'92s true.  In this world nobody needs a teacher for that sort of thing.  Well, we\'92re finished at this point.  All we have to do is thatch the ridgepole, the ridgepole.  Go look for thatch to make the overhang too, the overhang. [32]\
109. H: Hey, hurry it up, hurry it up!  There\'92s already a place for it up there.	\
110. H: Pass it up, pass it up!\
111. T: Here, here! Make the overhang properly\'97people will laugh if it\'92s not good!\
112. H: Aw, we\'92ve done it before!  If that\'92s all there is [left to do].\
113. T: If you\'92ve done it before, that\'92s fine. Well, at this point this house has been completely built, right? Now that it\'92s all finished, what will you do with this place here?  Will it be the place where you cook food, this area?\
114. H: Over here is where the fireplace will be installed.\
115. T: The fireplace, over there.\
116. H: Over there is the bedroom.\
117. T: The bedroom.  Is that the living room [33]over there?\
118. H: Yep.  The place where visitors will sit.\
119. T: There are three rooms.  Each kind of place has its own name.  So, if you say it\'92s finished, that\'92s all there is to it.\
120. Kachin: Ah, the house is all built now.  Since many people will live here [34], the house is also very big.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 Footnotes\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 [1]  
\f2\fs44 t\'f3-l\'e0\uc0\u660 :
\fs96  
\fs40 see the diagram of a Lahu house under construction in DL, Plate 68. 
\f0 \
[2]  
\f2 b\'e0\uc0\u660  ve:  'cut into lengths of wood; cut into boards'.\
[3]  \uc0\u596 \u772 -ch\'ee: 'that which is eaten with rice', lit. "rice-lifter", often conventionally translated as 'curry'. The person for whom the volunteers are\
      working is normally expected to feed them. \
[4]  pa-m\'f4-pa-k\'e2\uc0\u660 : pa-m\'f4 'carp', pa-k\'e2\u660  'canned fish' (< Thai plaa-kl\'e0k).\
[5]  The laughter is because everybody knows that chickens are hard to come by in the impoverished village.\
[6]  Pork, the best of meats, is only eaten a few times a year, and is even less likely than chicken to be offered to the house-builders.\
[7]  The name of Y\'e2-p\uc0\u97 \u772 -\u603 \u769  (lit. "Little Son") is often shortened to P\u97 \u772 -\u603 \u769 .\
[8]  Returning to the topic after the food-fantasy is over.\
[9]  	l\uc0\u601 \u769  l\u603 \u768  l\u601 \u769  t\'f9: lit. "as for there being more than enough, there will be more than enough".\
[10] \uc0\u596 \u768 -c\u603  1. 'a pair (including cosmological pairs like sun and moon)'. 2. 'an even number'. Traditional Lahu roofs are pitched, with the two sides\
      slanting down from the ridgepole.	\
[11] In order to fix problems with the roof.\
[12] There are two inversions in this sentence. The normal order would be: \uc0\u331 \'e0-h\u616  y\u596 \u770  th\'e0\u660  ca na-ni n\u101 \u772 .\
[13] Everybody evidently felt that this was a snappy comeback. Perhaps some previous incident is referred to.\
[14] That is, the wood for the fireplace props.\
[15] Na-b\uc0\u603 \u768  l\u596 \u768 -q\'e1: probably refers to the River Ping (also Lahuized as	 n\'e0-p\'e8n or n\'e0-p\'ean), a tributary of the Chao Phraya, having its source near Chiang Dao,\
      quite close to Huey Tat.\
[16] By this mild expletive I translate a string of final exclamatory particles: v\uc0\u616 \u770  \'e0 y\'e2-o n\u101 \u772 .\
[17] Perhaps the Headman is concerned that the wood for the fireplace was left sitting there too long.\
[18] 
\i Michelis champaca (Magnoliaceae)
\i0 .\
[19] tha-ph\'ee: split bamcoo slats used for walls and flooring.\
[20] ch\uc0\u596  (m)\'e2 m\u596 \u768  j\u596 : lit. "people have never seen".\
[21] A long-time resident of Huey Tat, of Jingpho ethnicity. Everybody good-naturedly calls him Kh\'e1-p\uc0\u97 \u772  'Kachin'.\
[22] bo l\uc0\u596 \u768  ve: 1. 'pray (in church)' 2. 'say grace before meals', lit. "beg for favor".\
[23] k\uc0\u603 \u770 \u660 -\'9a\u616 \u772 : bamboo sticks forming the horizontal framework of a roof, to which the tiers of thatch are attached..\
[24] y\uc0\u603 \u768 -k\u603 \u770 \u660 : a synonym of k\u603 \u770 \u660 -\'9a\u616 \u772 .\
[25] v\'e2-ne: bamboo fibers used for tying.\
[26] I.e., tie the thatch to the roof-sticks.\
[27] Here the Teacher ostensibly turns to the people who have been standing around watching.\
[28] \'9a\'e1 \uc0\u103 \u776 \u596 \u768  b\'e0 ve c\u603  t\'ed y\'f2: lit. "you're just throwing away your breath".\
[29] I.e., 'Don't try to keep pace with the others, or compare your output to theirs.'\
[30] \'9au y\'e2, lit. "other people's children", here referring to marriageable girls. \
[31] I.e., 'You shouldn't begrudge them their little diversions after a hard day's work.'\
[32] y\uc0\u616 \u770 -v\'ea\u660 : lit. "thatch-flower". A projection of thatch on a roof to carry away rain, here translated 'overhang'.\
[33] ch\uc0\u596  m\u616  g\u616 \u770  k\u616 \u768 : lit. "place where people sit for pleasure".	
\f0 \
[34] ch
\f3 \uc0\u596 
\f0  ma
\f3 \uc0\u770  \u97 \u772  l\u603 : 'since there are many people'; lit. "since people will keep being numerous"
\f0 \
\
}