{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12540\viewh15760\viewkind1\viewscale120
\deftab720
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 31 Marriage and Divorce
\b0 \
[Tape III, Side 2 #1]\
1: (H) Ahem, well, I have a little announcement[1] to make to you, brothers. On Monday morning[2] Ja\uc0\u118 \u772 a\u660  and Na\u104 \u772 pui are planning to get married! Now don't any of you go off anyplace![3] We're going to celebrate the wedding, you see. We'll have a feast in joy and gladness, I tell you. \
2: (T) Well, my brothers, getting married--the joining of hands in marriage--is a very important thing according to our Christian customs. Therefore let everyone remain [in the village] in joy and gladness. For this is no laughing matter for us. Since they are to take one another in marriage in the sight of God, we Christians must all observe the occasion[4] with the two of them in joy and gladness. \
3: (H) Well, will they slaughter a pig (to eat)?\
4: (T) Well, I daresay they'll have to slaughter a pig, all right. Even in times past--from time immemorial[5]--there has been a wise saying to the effect that when people get married, if they don't celebrate it with a wedding feast, there will be no luck and no success with the crops [that year], either. \
5: (H) Well, in that case, it ought to be done early in the morning, the whole business of killing the pig.[6] \
6: (T) Yes, we ought to do it rather early. According to my plans we'll kill the pig[7] at six-thirty, finishing with it at seven, then at eight o' clock we'll join their hands [in marriage]. In the church. Who all will be in the pig-slaughtering party? Make the arrangements properly, each side by \{itself / yourself\}.[8]\
7: (H) Well, on my side, Ja-ui is one, and Ja-ha is another, and Ja-geh is another. Three people ought to be enough, for my side. \
8: (T) Now on my side, Ja-qa is one, and Eh-kha-paw[9] is another, and Ja-qu-nyi is another--with these three people it should be enough, as far as my side goes. \
9: (H) It comes to six people. That's plenty. We have enough then, with that many. \
10: (T) Well, this girl now,[10] I don't really know her. Whose child is she anyway?\
11: (H) Oh, don't they say that she's the daughter of Ja-qeh and Na-da\uc0\u660 ?\
12: (T) Ja-qeh and Na-da\uc0\u660 's daughter, eh?\
13: (H) Yep.\
14: (T) Aha, so that's the one. But I doubt if she can take a husband yet! She's not big [enough] yet!\
15: (H) She's big enough, she's big enough now. \
16: (T) How old has she gotten to be, do they say?\
17: (H) She's eight.\
18: (T) Eight! Good grief, if she's only eight, how can she sleep with a man!\
19: (H) [laughing] She's thirteen, thirteen and a half![11]\
20: (Boy) I bet you can't get into her yet.[12]\
21: (H) She's thirteen and a half already.\
22: (T) Thirteen, huh? And how old do they say the man is? \
23: (H) I heard them say the man was twenty-five.\
24: (T) Twenty-five. Wow, a man that strong can't make it with a girl who's only eight! I mean, a girl who's only 
\i thirteen
\i0 .\
25: (H) She's big, I tell you. I'll bet she can. She's big [enough] already. Her frame is a good size.[13]\
26: (T) I wonder just how big her body is. Her frame, I mean.\
27: (H) It's plenty big, plenty big. (her frame).\
28: (T) The guy is big, you know! Because he's from great stock. \
29: (H) Oh, she's not afraid, they say. Since she's big already.\
30: (Kach) Could anybody make it with her now?\
[laughter]\
31: (H) They say she can, I tell you!\
32: (Boy) I still don't really know who she is.\
33: (H) Na-hpui, Na-hpui! Na-da\uc0\u660 's daughter. \
34: (boy) Oh.\
35: (T) I see. She's a north-country person, isn't she?\
36: (H) Right. A north-country girl, from up there. She lives south of Va-na,[14] they say. \
37: (Boy) \{Yes-sirree-Bob! / Ayuh!\}[15]\
38: Is she a Christian?\
39: (H) I hear she became one not long ago[16]--she's a Christian.\
40: Has she learned a little about our ways and customs already?\
41: (T) Well then, about the \{man / groom\}--whose son do they say he is?\
42: (H) You mean the groom?\
43: (T) Yes.\
44: (H) Didn't you hear me say he was Ja-qeh's son?[17]\
45: (T) Ja-qeh's son?\
46: (H) Ja-qeh's son--\
47: (T) I bet they call him Ja-qeh because he's an oddball.[18]\
48: (H) Exactly. He grows tea with the Thais. He's peculiar. \
49: Yeah. \
50: Because they say he acts like some kind of nut,[19] I bet.\
51: He's a nut, all-right-all-right.\
52: He's probably the farmer who--[20]\
53: (T) He's what you [call] a nut.\
54: He's probably the farmer who went and stole those people's things yesterday to feed his face and who the Thais chased and beat up [with sticks].\
55: (H) Of course. He's the guy they were talking about who stole their elephant-chains at Melhawmaw[21]--the elephant-ropes and the neck-chains and went and sold them to fill his belly! \
56: (T) Ah, ah, ah, ah.\
57: (Boy) The one who the dogs were chasing to bite!\
58: (T) Now I know, now I know\'85. Well then, the time has now come to join their hands in marriage. Haven't they beat the gong yet?[22] Have they beat it already?\
59: (H) They've beaten it, they've beaten it. Let's go, let's go.\
60: (T) You've heard it Everybody hears it.[23] I suppose everyone has heard it, eh?\
61: (H) We've heard it.\
62: (T) Ah, now I hear it [too]!\
63: (Boy) I hear it now!\
64: We ought to make it snappy and go.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1\qc
\cf0 * * *\
[In the church] \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\cf0 65: (T) Well, since these two friends of ours' getting married today--this morning--magnifies and elevates the very great laws and ways of God, of all of us have indeed arrived, He[24] will join their hands in marriage. At this time, do you, Java?,[25] swear in the sight of God and in the sight of all these people that you will not separate or stray[26] from this your wife Na-hpui[25] as long as you shall live, that you shall not abandon or reject her,[27] even should she become crippled or blind, even should she become sick or unwell: that until[28] you must be separated by death you will not separate or stray from her, neither abandoning nor rejecting her?\
66: (C\'e0-v\'e0\uc0\u660 ) I swear it. \
67: (T) He swears it. It is well. \
Now then, Na-hpui, [do you swear that] your husband who is now holding your hand--er--\
68: [prompting] Java\uc0\u660 !\
69: (T) --this man 
\i Java\uc0\u660 
\i0 --do you swear in the sight of God and in the sight of all these people that as long as you live, unless God should take you away and cause you to separate from one another, whether he should become ill and diseased, or crippled and blind, or poor and wretched, that you will look after him, and help him, and take care of him, that until you must be separated by death he will be your husband forever? \
70: (Na-ph\uc0\u616 \u770 ) I swear it.\
71: (T) she swears it. It is well. \
Well, then, [now] we just have to divide up the pork! Has the pork been divided yet?\
72: (H) It's [all] cut up and stacked, it's [all] cut up and stacked. Look over there!\
73: (T) Well, how shall we do it?\
74: (H) Shall we \{cook / boil\} it and eat it [all together]? Or shall we divide it up, among the various houses?\
75: (Kach) Divide it, divide it!\
76: (T) Divide it! \
77: (Boy) Divide it!\
78: (T) How shall we do it? Shall we make it one share per couple? Or else shall we make it one share per household?[29]\
79: Make it one share per household. It's too much trouble [otherwise]. \
80: (H) But look, I have many people [in my house], too or three couples, and if there are lots of them they want a lot to eat!\
81: (T) Even if you do have lots of people, when it's time to work, they don't do it! Only one person [from your house] did any work with this business.[30]\
82: Right! When it's time to work, only one person does it. \
83: (T) [But] when it's time to eat, they want to eat a lot! That's what [I call] being greedy! \
84: (H) Shouldn't this be what you call "acting out of voluntary charity"?[31] If you were being charitable, [everyone] ought to eat!\
85: (T) To receive voluntary charity, one should also do voluntary work! It's never all of us who do the work! \
86: (H) We 
\i do 
\i0 work!--\
87: (T) Only one person from your whole house, 
\i one person
\i0 . And when he does happen to come once in a while, he goes home before noon! When it comes to working. \
88: Would you swear that they don't work?\
89: (T) I would swear to it. I never once saw them working.\
90: (H) Well then, how much pork will we eat, \{all together / in all\}? \
91: (Boy) Don't give those guys anything to eat!\
92: (H) Thirty-five kilos, we'll eat 35 kilos.\
93: (T) Are you setting up a rule[32] [that it should be] 35 kilos?\
94: (H) I 
\i am
\i0  making it a rule. Starting from today and in the future everyone will have to observe[33] it, and it alone.\
95: (T) If that is the only \{permissible course / way it may be done), I'm afraid[34] that only those who are well-off will [even] be able to set up housekeeping. If you're poor--the poor and penniless won't be able to set up housekeeping like them. \
96: (H) As for that, that's something that both sides--the groom's parents and the bride's parents--should agree on. There are people who join hands [in marriage] even without having a wedding-feast[35]. There are also those who just kill a little chicken[35] or two and get married. If your word is good--[37]\
97: (T) Oh, well in that case it's all right. So, how shall we divide up this pork? If no one objects[38], distribute it to the [various] houses, headman--give it out to the houses!\
98: (H) Here, give it out to the houses, to the houses. Give it out to the houses! Try dividing it up so each house gets eight MEH.[39] Take it and put it in [the scales]! Spear[40] [the meat]!\
99: Spear it, spear it, spear it! \
100: (H) Put it in, into that scale.\
101: (T) Ah, everybody must lend a hand[41] in the proper spirit. Otherwise, if we're all arguing and squabbling about it, if they should overhear us, if the others overhear us, it would be very embarrassing. We'd be ashamed in front of them.\
102: (H) Ah, here come the people! Give out the pork. It's already divided up. \
103: (T) Announce[42] it, announce it! \
104: Come and get the pork, come and get the pork! It's for the whole blessed village[43]! \
105: We're coming to get it, we're coming to get it.\
106: (T) I don't see them coming from over there yet, from Jabuuh's part of the village.[44] \
107: (H) Go call them, go call them!\
108: (T) He says to go call Jabuuh's part of the village. \
109: Jabuuh! Come and get your pork, I tell you!\
110: (C\'e0-b\'f9\uc0\u660 ) [lazily] Let me make some tea first.[45]\
111: (T) There was plenty of time to make tea this morning! You didn't even come to the wedding ceremony.[46] People like you are hard to teach to and hard to preach to,[47] that's all there is to it! It never fails. \
112: (Boy) He's just smoking his opium[48]!\
113: (T) He \{has a flat forehead / plays it close to the forehead[49]\}, you know.\
[laughter]\
114: (C\'e0-b\'f9\uc0\u660 ) Fault-finding bastards! I wouldn't eat anything of yours now anyway!\
115: (T) It's all the same to us if you don't eat! Since we've tried to offer it to you properly.[50]\
116: Don't eat it then! You're the only one who doesn't get along with the others.\
117: (H) Don't quarrel, don't quarrel. Let's do this charity, let's do this charity, gaining grace and gaining blessings.\
118: (T) The Sexton's part of the village hasn't come yet either, strange to say![51] Carrying on this way, you people are hard to reason with. Even when we say "Come and eat!" you still don't come. \
119: (H) Look up there, look up there, I see his son coming, look up there! Give it to him. Give him a \{bundle / spearing\} [of meat]. One bundle. \
120: (T) Give it to him, one bundle.\
121: Here, here, here you are. Tayk[51] it away! \
121A: (Boy playingn C\'e0-b\'f9\uc0\u660 's son)__INAUDIBLE__ It's not even as big as my dick. \
122: (H) Well, it's all over then, this wedding-feast. [We've finished] giving out the pork, each house's share. If anybody hasn't come, it's dark out already[52]\'85. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1\qc
\cf0 [A few weeks or months later]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\cf0 123: (T) Well, this time we've got to discuss my son's running back home [and abandoning his wife].[53] Ah, my son has gone away from you[54]! And you haven't seen him come back to your house yet?\
124: (H) I don't see him coming back!\
124A: He can't be reasoned with, that son of yours![55]\
125: (Boy) He ought to be thrashed, right?\
126: (T) That boy says that I scolded him, that's what he's saying! But I have never scolded or rebuked him, not once![56]\
127: I told you so! "They're not old enough yet, don't marry them off,[57] don't marry them off!" I told you.\
128: (T) Nobody married them off. They went and fell in love on us all by themselves.[58] There was nothing anybody could do about it. A thing like that--\
129: I'll bet he ran away [from her] because he couldn't stand sleeping with her.\
130: That's probably not true.\
131: Sure. If that wasn't it, he shouldn't have run away.\
132: (T) I wonder if he left because he was tired of the work. Since \{it meant / he was\} working for other people--\
133: There wasn't all that much work, as far as I could see.\
134: (H) He's always sleeping, always sleeping--he's as lazy as they 
\b come
\b0 , that one.\
135: That's not true. He just couldn't stand the woman. \
136: (T) Oh, good god! Our children are hard to teach to and hard to preach to! I doubt if they'll ever be put to the standard of other people's children.[59] If you tell them [ to come] 
\i here
\i0 , they'll go 
\i there
\i0 . If you tell them [to go] 
\i there
\i0 , they'll come 
\i here
\i0 . Ah, me, me! I'm tired of living. I'm ashamed [to compare them to] other people's children.  \
137: (H) If you mean that son [of yours], he's a lazy good-for-nothing. He doesn't earn his living by working and toiling.\
138: (T) That's just it, that's just it. \
139: Oho, speaking of that son of yours, he's got a prick the size of somebody's forearm, so--\
[laughter]\
140: (T) Come now. \
141: (Boy) Well, her big snatch, her big snatch was large enough, wasn't it?\
142: (T) Well, I can't do anything about that son of mine anymore. I'll just have to go to the headman. I'll just have to go to the headman. Headman! Call all these people together, please. I can't cope. \
143: (H) Hey there! Let everyone come to my house tonight! Here's a matter that has come up. You may not absent yourselves!\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1\qc
\cf0 * * *\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\cf0 144: Say, I wonder why there are people shouting up there tonight. \
145: (T) [playing the role of a bystander] Oh, they say it's about somebody's son. Somebody's son can't stay with his in-laws[60]--\
146: Always, always, it's about somebody's son!\
147: God, I'm tired to death of listening to stories about somebody's son!\
148: (Boy) No, sir, I'm not going. I'm not going.\
149: (T) You can't absent yourselves, boys. That's been pounded into your heads[61]! You've really got to go. Like[62] it's been drummed into everybody's head: you cannot absent yourselves. Somebody if 
\i you
\i0  have a case for discussion you won't have anybody to listen to you.[63] You ought to go and listen, even if you don't say anything or want to do anything. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1\qc
\cf0 [Three people talk at once]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\cf0 150: (H) Well, has everybody arrived?\
151: (T) Yes, we people are all that there will be, I guess.\
152: (H) Come in, come in!\
153: Let's discuss it till we get to the bottom of it.[64]\
154: (H) Our business this evening concerns this pair of young people. These young people have behaved thus-and-so. All of you consider what is to be done. \
155: (T) [in role of pastor] Dear Lord! After swearing and vowing in the sight of God, and taking each other and marrying one another, how could it[65] be good for them to act this way! How could it[66] be in accordance with the will of God, acting in this manner! I am your Pastor, so let me give you some words of instruction. If you wish to listen, that's up to you. If you don't want to listen, that's up to you. I say it is not in accordance with the will of God! \
156: (H) [addressing the young man's father] Well, as far as this son [of yours] running back to you goes[66], it's because of 
\i your
\i0  upbringing and 
\i your
\i0  teaching and 
\i your
\i0  instruction that he acts this way. You are to blame for not sending him back [to his wife]. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1
\cf0 157: (T) [playing role of groom's father] Ah, this so of mine is unteachable and uninstructible! All of you have known long since[67] that he's hard to teach to and hard to preach to. There's nothing to be done. Since you've got the 
\i son 
\i0 [here in count] you've just got to put the son on trial and tell 
\i him
\i0  what to do.[68]\
158: (H) Well, it has been several days now since you led[69] your son back to your house. Whatever is going on, you ought to know all about it. It's your son, after all.\
159: (T) Well, then, you're telling me [that I've got] to pay compensation, aren't you!\
160: If you don't [stay] married, you've got to pay compensation.\
161: (H) Decide the case![70] Decide the case!\
162: (The groom) Whether I live or die I'm not going to have [that woman]!\
163: (H) Well, my brother, look here,[71] let us try to bear in mind the principles which our ancestors used to observe of old, and act accordingly, shall we? Like when a husband and wife say they will get divorced,[72] whichever one it is who doesn't want to stay married and [who wants to] cast the other off, he is the one who must pay for it. Our ancestors have had such a rule and such a precept.[73]\
164: (T) Yes, although some say that "people are greater than the law,"[74] we are all under the law. Anybody is. \
165: That's right, that's right. However you slice
\b  
\b0 it.[75]\
166: (T) Come on and give the verdict!\
167: There's nothing he can do now.[76] His obligation[77] is too great. \
168: (H?) Well, for our guiding principle let us act according to those which were observed in the days of our ancestors, shall we not, my brothers? According to the practice of our ancestors, whenever anyone didn't want to stay married and cast off [a spouse] he had to [pay] fifteen rupees.[78] And in case there were children, it was thirty rupees.[79] Tonight you all [should settle] this matter according to the rule observed by our forefathers that "He who abandons [his spouse] must pay for it."[80] \
169: Pay the money, pay the money!\
170: (The husband) Here, here, here [it is].\
171: Count it, Headman, count it.\
172: (T) If it comes to 150 baht, it's customary [for the headman] to deduct[81] 15 baht, you know. The "listening-price." Here, you take 135 baht with you. This 15 baht is taken out to cover the "sitting expenses" for all these people--the tea money and the tobacco money.\
173: So here, take it, take it, take it already![82]\
174: [chuckling] Since you've paid me my compensation, that's all there is to it. \
175: (T) Well, this business is over and done with. \
 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1

\b \cf0 Footnotes\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\ri0\sl480\slmult1

\b0 \cf0

[1] k\'e2 l\'e2 t\'f9
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -l\uc0\u596  'a matter to let you hear'\
[2] \'9a\'ed p
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u768 
\f0  m\'fb-\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  qo \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  "on the morning when the week is finished." Sunday is \'9a\'ed-ni.\
[3] The expression t\'ea k\'e0 qay ve, lit. "go to a place", means "go off someplace else".\
[4] lit: 'must all do [it].'\
[5] t\'ea co p
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u768 
\f0  t\'ea c\'e1: for Q@1@ + p
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u768 
\f0  + Q@2@, see grammar, _____. \
[6] t\'ea \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  is a
\i  group
\i0  classifier: "all the various things connected with the pig-killing." Eating a pig is a very special event for the impoverished Lahu; something that is done only a few times a year. \
[7] v\'e0\uc0\u660  d\u596 \u770 \u660  ve: lit. "beat the pig (to death)."\
[8] That is, the bride's side and the groom's side each designates several men for the job or honor of serving on the slaughtering-team. \
[9] A Shan name.\
[10] The P@n@ m\uc0\u603  conveys a nuance of wonderment. See
\i  grammar
\i0 , _____.\
[11] The Headman was only teasing.\
[12] b\'e8 k\uc0\u601  ve: lit. "to tempt inside," i.e., to accomplish intromission of the male member. The sequence b\'e8 k\u601  was disavowed by C\'e0-m
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  in 1972. [CHECK AGAIN]. Maybe substitute te k\uc0\u601  'stick into'.\
[13] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -\'9a\ul \uc0\u603 \ulnone -ma 'a female body.' cf. 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -\'9a\ul \uc0\u603 \ulnone -ph\'e2 'a male body.' 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -to is a Shan borrowing. \
[14] A village in eastern [check] Shan State, Burma. \
[15] The boy is imitating the northern-dialect way of saying "Yes."\
[16] ca ph
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  la g\uc0\u616 \u770  \'9a\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone : V@h@ + g\uc0\u616 \u770  'to be new at V@h@' ing.' Usually mean 'to V@h@ for fun.'\
[17] The Headman is confused (see speech 11)--either he forgot that c\'e0-q
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0  was the 
\i bride
\i0 's father or else both fathers-in-law have the same name. \
[18] q
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0  
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  ve means 'to be peculiar, queer.' It is common to assign nicknames by prefixing c\'e0-(men) or na-(women) to nouns or adjectives describing salient aspects of the individual's character. \
[19] k\'e2\uc0\u660 -ku ve (slang) "be an eccentric, a nut." Lit: 'be cold and dried out,' as in y\'e2\u660  k\'e2\u660 -ku 'dried fish,' \u596  k\'e2\u660 -ku 'dried boiled rice.' See old notebook, pp. 183-184.\
[20] This speech is interrupted (see #54); given the radical difference between English and Lahu word order, in translating there is nothing one can do here but indicate the first few words of the English translation, rather than of the Lahu original (
\i yesterday others' things
\i0 ) \
[21] A place not far from the village where the Thai keep elephants to work in the teak-forests. \
[22] To summon the villagers to the church.\
[23] l.l., 'everybody except me.'\
[24] We know that God is the subject because of the 3d --> 3d benefactive verb p\'ee. If the Pastor were the subject, the Pv l\'e2 would be used instead. \
[25] Here, as in speeches 67, 68, and 69, the speakers mistakenly use the names c\'e0-q
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0  and na-d\'e0\uc0\u660  instead of c\'e0-v\'e0\u660  and n\'e0-ph\u616 \u770  for the bridal pair. The former names are 'really' those of the bride's parents! See speeches 11 and 16. \
[26] <m\'e2 ph\'e2\uc0\u660  m\'e2 g\u616 \u770 > "not-separate-not-visit [other women]"\
[27] <m\'e2 chi m\'e2 b\'e0> "not-pick up-not-throw away"\
[28] Lit: "\{if it is not that / 
\i unless
\f2\i0 \}
\f0  you must etc."\
[29] A household may include grandparents and/or collateral relations. \
[30] I.e., helping with the preparations for the wedding.\
[31] bo te ve. I.e., "shouldn't 
\i everyone
\i0  be fed, regardless of whether he worked or not?"\
[32] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -l\'ee t\uc0\u603  ve. It is the headman's prerogative, subject to approval by the village at large, to lay down general guidelines of this sort. \
[33] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -l\'ee y\uc0\u603 \u770  ve: lit. "use the rule"\
[34] \'e0-m\'f9 \'85 (p
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f0  \'e0) serves to introduce warnings or unpleasant predictions.\
[35] (SUBTLE) Lit: "There are people who, even if they join hands [in marriage], don't have a wedding-feast." Lahu attaches the concessive marker to the opposite clause from the English. \
[36] \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 -m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -cw\'ee is said to be a Red Lahu word. \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 -m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -\'fai is the 'quail-tailed chicken' (H.Y.). \
[37] The Headman leaves the rest of his thought unsaid: "As long as you are a man of your word, any arrangement you might make will be all right." The Headman has retreated from his previous hasty statement which was interpreted as laying down a blanket rule of 35 kg of pork per wedding. He only meant to say, he now claims, that 
\i if
\i0  a pig is slaughtered by a wealthy bridal pair, it should be of a standard size. \
[38] m\'e2 h\'ea\uc0\u660  qo 'if not; otherwise.' Here elliptical for something like ni-ma m\'e2 c\u596 \u770  p\ul a\ulnone  c
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  ve m\'e2 h\'ea\uc0\u660  qo "if there is no one who disagrees."\
[39] h\'ed m\uc0\u603 \u770 \u660 : 800 grams. A m\u603 \u770 \u660  is 1/10 of a kilogram. \
[40] th\uc0\u596  ve: 'pierce a hole in a piece of meat and put a bamboo strip through the hole for a handle'\
[41] lit: "must try helping" \uc0\u103 \u776 a ga ni p\'ee (@v@V V@h@ V@v@ V@v@)\
[42] k\'f9 p\'ee ve: "call out (to someone).' \
[43] <t\'ea-qh\'e2\uc0\u660  t\'ea-l
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 >\
[44] A qh\'f4 is a subdivision of a village, including 2 or 3 houses connected by geographico-polico-consanguineal ties. [CHECK]\
[45] l\'e0 t\uc0\u603  d
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  "put on [the fire] tea to drink."\
[46] l\'e0\uc0\u660 -q\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  t\'f4\uc0\u660  k
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  "the place where the hands were joined."\
[47] <m\ul a\ulnone  h\ul a\ulnone  \'9a\'ea\uc0\u660  h\ul a\ulnone >\
[48] y\ul a\ulnone -phy\ul i\ulnone  l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  ve: lit. "lick opium"\
[49] n\ul a\ulnone -q\ul a\ulnone -p\uc0\u616  p\'e2-n\'ea 
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  te ve "to do it near the forehead," or "to make one's forehead flat" (p\'e2 'feat,' (p\'e2-)n\'ea 'near'). I.e., to be obtuse or stubborn. Amended in old notebook, p. 399 to be "be scrawny [insult]/have no meat on one's bones" (e.g., of an opium addict).\
[50] I.e., we've fulfilled our societal obligation, so we don't care whether or not you fulfill yours. \
[51] y\'f9 \uc0\u331 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  v\uc0\u601 
\f2 -
\f0 \uc0\u660  (V@h@ V@v@ P@v@): \uc0\u331 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  is Yellow Lahu for ni (V@v@ = 'V@h@ and see'). The dialect mixture is intended to be humorous, as is the Cockney rendition of 'take.' \
[52] I.e., if somebody hasn't come to pick up his meat yet, it's too late now. \
[53] q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0  (@v@V) ph\uc0\u596  (V@h@) q\'f2\uc0\u660  (V@h@) e ve: "to flee and come back home."\
[54] The speaker is addressing the bride's father.\
[55] Lit., "be unaware of human speech".\
[56] This speech would be more appropriate in the mouth of the bride's father. The Pastor is playing several roles at once! \
[57] ka ve: 'to give in marriage; to arrange a marriage'\
[58] c\uc0\u596 \u770  v\u601  l\'e2 ve (lit: 'he [himself] is right') is a S-P cpd meaning 'to do sthg. on one's own initiative.'\
[59] \'9au y\'e2 l\uc0\u596  \'9a\ul u\ulnone  ve: "to be the same as others' children's matters." Usually simply \'9a\ul u\ulnone  l\uc0\u596  \'9au ve "to be up to other people's standards." cf. Agriculture [check], _____.\
[60] \'9au y\'e2 \'9au g\uc0\u603  m\'e2 ch\u603 \u770  ph
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0 : lit. "somebody's son can't stay with somebody."\
[61] Lit: 'pounded into your foreheads'.  \'f3-q\ul o\ulnone  is also usable in this idiom. See the next sentence but one. \
[62] qhe 'thus' used as a sentence-initial conjunction is rather like the hippy use of 'like.'\
[63] I.e., unless you go listen to others' problems now.\
[64] qha ni 
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  j
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  d\'e0\uc0\u660  \'f2 (\u42890  l\'f2) > j
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  d\'e0\uc0\u660  qha ni \'f2 
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  (Pvf IMPV) "until we look at it"\
[65] This rhetorical question translates the Pvf of wonderment n
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f2 -
\f0 \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  ~ n
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f2 -
\f0 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f2 .\

\f0 66. y\'e2 chi q\'f4\uc0\u660  ve n
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  q\uc0\u603  ph\u596  q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0  e ve q\'f4\uc0\u660  qo \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  would be better style. \
[67] \'f4 th\'e2 t\'ea ni (q\'f4\uc0\u660  qo).\
[68] Without wasting time trying to blame the
\i  father
\i0  for his son's behavior. \
[69] The speaker uses the expression \'9a\uc0\u603  q\'f2\u660  e ve 'to 
\i lead
\i0  back home,' hereby implying that the son left his wife on the father's instigation. See also speech #156 above. \
[70] t\'e2\uc0\u660  ve is a Shan borrowing meaning 'to pass sentence.'\
[71] The emphatic Pvf n\'e8 is here used as an attention-getter, separated from the rest of the sentence by comma-pauses. \
[72] b\'e0 d\'e0\uc0\u660  ve: "cast each other away"\
[73] <
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -l\'ee 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 >\
[74] ch\uc0\u596  \ul \uc0\u616 \ulnone  h\'ec\uc0\u660  m\'e2 \ul \uc0\u616 \ulnone  "people are great, the law is not great."\
[75] Lit: "however you do."\
[76] Except pay the compensation.\
[77] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -bo \ul \uc0\u616 \ulnone  \'e0\uc0\u660  
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -bo is a very abstract word with several distinct senses that are interrelated in complex ways. See Dictionary _____.\
[78] th
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0 . A Burmese unit of currency. One th
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  \uc0\u42890  5 Thai baht. The total fine was thus 75 baht, or $3.75. \
[79] "Three kh\'e1. One kh\'e1 (< Shan) is worth 10 th
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0 , or 50 baht. The total fine in this case was thus equal to 150 baht, or $7.50. \
[80] In more careful language, this sentence would read: y\'e0\uc0\u660 -p
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f0  h\'e1 t
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  \'e0-\'9aw\'e8 ch\uc0\u596 -m\u596 \u770  ve 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -l\'ee chi y\uc0\u603 \u770  \ul a\ulnone  ve qhe k\uc0\u601  a-\u660  n
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -h\uc0\u616  \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  "a-\'9au t\'ea \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2 b\'e0 ve qo \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  chi (t\'ea \uc0\u103 \u776 a) k\u601  a-\u660 " \u42890  As for this matter tonight, you (must) put in (money) according to the rule observed by our forefathers, that 'He who abandons his spouse must pay for it'."\
[81] 15 b\'e0\uc0\u660  \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  p
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u768 
\f0  (V@h@) l\uc0\u603  y\'f9 (V@h@) j\uc0\u596  (P@v@): "customary (P@v@) to \{waste / spend\} 15 baht and (have it) taken (by the headman)"\
[82] The speaker is carried away in a plethora of particle-repetitions. }
