{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 32 How Woman Got her Clitoris
\b0  and 
\b The Lawsuit between the Animals and the Human Beings
\b0 \
\
(C\'e0-bo)\
\
1. This is a story about how God, once upon a time, after He had created Heaven and Earth, gave out gifts [to all his creatures].\
2. Once upon a time, after God had finished creating Heaven and Earth, \{He/God\} provided all the things needed by all the people and creatures[1] \{on earth/in the world\}, whether it was all the \{human beings/people\} or all the kinds of animals, God created everything for them.\
3. After he finished creating [all this], God spoke thus: \'93Come take them, everybody\'92s things! [2]  Whatever it is [you] need.\'94\
4. When he said this, all kinds of animals came.\
5. The creatures who [would] bear horns took away [their] horns, and the creatures who [would] bear fur took away [their] fur.\
6. Having done all this, after each creature [3] had carried everything off, for the second time God gave them [things] again.\
7. And so, when he said, \'93Take it!\'94 they [all] came.\
8. A certain woman came, and this is what she said:\
9. \'93I\'92ve heard that You have made something called \'91a penis\'92.\'94\
10. Then, at that point, when [God] said, \'93OK, come take a penis that I\'92ve made,\'94 this woman suddenly ran up, and she grabbed a big horse penis that was there.\
11. A penis that [God] had made. [4]\
12. When [God] said, \'93This one is not yours! This is for the horse!\'94 he picked it up [hurled/threw it] onto the ground and stamped on it, so that\'92s why [pubic] hair is all tangled and bushy.\
13. That\'92s how the old story goes. [5]\
14. A second thing\'97\'93We women are still not quite complete,\'94 they said.\
15. \'93Our bodies are still not quite complete.\
16. \'93Please add something,\'94 [they] once again went to beg [of God].\
17. Well, [the God] cut off the tiny little glans [6] of a dog there, and threw it so it stuck onto the woman. [7]\
18. Because of this, women have \{clitorises/clitorides\}, it is said.\
19. An old Lahu story tells it this way.\
***\
20. Now a second matter, the story about how the animals and the human beings \{went to court/ had a lawsuit\} with each other.\
21. One day it happened this way.\
22. The people/humans and the animals took each other to court.\
23. These animals went to God and said, \'93Oh, those so-called humans of yours, they\'92re always shooting at us.\
24. \'93They don\'92t even \{call/ invite/ summon\} us [to make friends].\
25. \'93They don\'92t treat us [well] in any way at all.\
26. \'93All they do is shoot at us,\'94 they said.\
27. \'93You please teach them properly, those humans.\'94\
28. So God asked the animals, he asked a certain barking-deer, [8] \'93Haven\'92t they invited you?\'94 he said.\
29. When God asked him this, he said, \'93As for inviting, they do invite us.\
30. \'93[But] when they invite us, they just strike out at us!\
31. \'93We don\'92t have time to do anything [to escape them].\'94\
\
Footnotes:\
\
[1] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 -c\u601 \u768  can mean either \'91thing\'92 or, in this context, \'91creature\'92.\
[2] Or \'93Come everybody, take your things!\'94\
[3] The story-teller uses \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2 \'91All for humans\'92, here extended to all God\'92s creatures.\
[4] Intending it for a horse.\
[5] ch
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 -m
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u770 -kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u770  \'91traditional saying/story\'92\
[6] n\uc0\u105 \u772  \'f3-q\u111 \u772 , lit. \'93penis-head.\'94\
[7] Not clear whether the whole group of women was so provided. Probably meant to apply to the first woman created.\
[8] 
\i Cervulus muntjac
\i0 , known as the best eating in the jungle, now all but wiped out in Thailand.\
}