{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 DoulosSIL;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13680\viewh20960\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 #33 The Trader and the Widow\'92s Balls\

\b0 \
1. Well, I\'92ll just tell you a little story now.\
2. Once upon a time, a man was going around trading.\
3. As he was doing his trading, when he was selling things in a certain village [1], he \
    happened to go into a widow\'92s home.\
4. When he happened to enter the widow\'92s house, there was a little girl there.\
5. \'93Say, daughter, where has your mother gone?\'94 he asked the girl.\
6. \'93Oh, my mother has gone to the fields, she\'92s not home,\'94 she said.\
7. The trader said, \'93It would have been better if your mother were here. [2]\
8. \'93In my hand I have 
\i sparkling red and yellow balls
\i0  [3] to launch at [4] her!\'94\
9. Having said this, he went off to do his trading, he went on and on, then after he had sold \
    all his wares, when he came back, that little girl happened to be in the widow\'92s\
    house again.\
10. When he came back again he asked the girl, \'93Daughter, where has your \
      mother gone?\'94\
11. \'93My mother\'92s not home. She went to the fields,\'94 the girl said.\
12. \'93Oh no-o-o!  If that mother of yours had only been here it would\'92ve been mu-u-ch \
     better!  I would have launched sparkling red and yellow balls at her!\'94 he said, and went \
     off again.		\
13. \'93Oh, mother, [5] a while ago, somebody said that he had \'91sparkling red and yellow \
     balls\'92 to launch at you, if only you had been at home!\'94\
14. After this, when the time came for him to return from his trading, he arrived [at the \
      widow\'92s house] once more.\
15. Since the widow had happened to return home just as he arrived, there she was \
      this time.\
16. \'93You said a while ago, my child told me, \'91If you
\f1 r mother
\f0  had been at home, I\'92d have \
       launched  
\i sparkling red and yellow balls
\i0  at her!\'92"\
17. \'93Yes, if I can\'92t produce those sparkling red and yellow balls, I\'92ll give you 60 rupees,\'94 [6] \
       he said, so she said, \'93O.K., do try doing it!\'94\
18. So since she had said this, he got an idea, and he went off looking for fireflies.\
19. After he had searched and searched for fireflies, he stuffed his pants full of them.\
20. Then he led her into a dark room, and suddenly he opened up and released them, \
      all sparkling red and yellow, he let them go at her.\
21. But what happened was, this woman had some hot water on, and when she poured it \
      down his pants [7] she burned the guy's dick.\
22. When his dick got burnt, he suddenly ran away, up there in the jungle, and he set it \
      down on top of a rock and blew on it.\
23. While he was trying to cool it off in a breezy place, the little girl followed him, and \
      said, \'93Mommy, mommy!\'94\
24. \'93Look, look!\'94 she said. \'93When he made the sparkling red and yellow balls for us just \
      now, it wasn\'92t sharp enough, so he\'92s sharpening it up there!\'94\
25. \'93On a rock!\'94 she said.\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 \
[1] \'9au qh\'e2
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 , lit. "others\'92 village"; \'9au \'91remote 3p pronoun\'92.\
[2] The contrary-to-fact sense is conveyed by the combination of the conditional P
\fs30 unf
\fs36  
\i qo
\i0  \
     and the change-of-state P
\fs32 v
\fs36  
\i \'f2
\i0 .\
[3] \'e0-m
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f3 -
\f0 j
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u768 \u660 
\f0  n
\f1 \'ee
\f0  \'9a\'ed. A complex pun is involved here: \'e0-m
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f3 -
\f0 j
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u768 \u660 
\f0  \'91spark\'92; ni ~ n\'ed \'91red\'92; \'9ai ~ \
     \'9a\'ed \'91yellow\'92; \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  \'91round object, ball\'92; n
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  \'91penis\'92; n
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0 -\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  \'91testicle\'92; n\'ee \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  \'91two round objects\'92; \
     n
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0 -\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  n\'ee \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  \'91two testicles\'92.\
[4] p\uc0\u601  p\'ee ve: \'91send at a 3p\'92. A more vivid verb is used in sentence (14): ph
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0  \'91release, let fly \
      at; fire off; discharge\'92.\
[5] Here the narrator puts the words into the daughter\'92s mouth, quoting what she said to \
      her mother.\
[6] h\'f4
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  kh\'e1: Shan \'9260\'92. Cf. Si. 
\i h\'f2k 
\i0 \'916\'92, Shan 
\i khan
\i0  \'91group of 10\'92. With this Shan \
     numeral, Lahu 
\i phu 
\i0 \'91money\'92 is translatable by the Shan currency in use during the \
     British raj in Burma, i.e., 
\i rupees
\i0 .\
[7] Undoubtedly mistaking the flashing fireflies for flames.}