{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww27720\viewh20080\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 34 Farting and Playing Tag\
\
1. Now I\'92d like to tell you (an old/a traditional\} Lahu story.  Listen up now.\
2. Once upon a time a father-in-law and a son-in-law were farting and playing tag.  I\'92ll tell you about it now, so listen.\
3. The father-in-law said, \'93Hey, son-in-law, if you\'92re so smart, try catching me when I fart.\'94[1]\
4. \'93OK,\'94 the son-in-law said, \'93I\'92ll chase you.  But you be quiet first.\'94\
5. The father-in-law said, \'93You\'92re a real son-in-law![2] You\'92ve chased me and caught me.  You\'92re a real son-in-law!\'94\
6. That\'92s pretty funny, isn\'92t it!  Very amusing.\
7. That\'92s this Lahu story.  That\'92s the end.\
\
Notes:\
\
[1] His fart would be the signal to start the game.\
[2] m\'e1 t
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  y\'f2 l
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 ; probably an elliptical way of saying m\'e1 c\'e0 j\'e2 t
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  y\'f2 l
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 , \'91Son-in-law is really smart!\'92\
\
Exegesis:\
\
The point to this story is rather obscure.  Perhaps the s-i-l\'92s telling the f-i-l to be quiet first was a clever way of ensuring that the f-i-l couldn\'92t sneak in a silent fart and get too much of a head start.\
\
But why did the f-i-l say, \'93You\'92ve chased and caught me?\'94\
\
In my original notebook I had written: \
\
\'93The narrative would be much improved by an interpretation like: qhe te l
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0  
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -p
\f2 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0  chi t\'ea p
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f0  t\'ed qh
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0  t\'ea qh
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0  t\'e8
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  qha-p\'ee l
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 , 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -m\'e1 y
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  th\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -y\'f9 vey\'f2. t\'ea kh
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f0  g\'e0 l
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f0  \'e0-p
\f2 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0  th\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -mi ve y\'f2.\'94\
\
But then why did s-i-l tell f-i-l to be quiet before starting?\
}