{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14660\viewh18960\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 35 In unity there is strength \
\

\b0 \
1. Once upon a time there was a man who had five sons.\
\
2. Every day all they did was quarrel with each other.\
\
3. What one would say the other wouldn\'92t listen to.\
\
4. So having seen this, their father said to them:\
\
5. \'93My boys, every day you quarrel with each other.\'94\
\
6. \'93 You don\'92t get along with one another.\'94\
\
7. \'93Break off a stick from a tree and bring it to me.\'94\
\
8. \'93Each one of you break one off and bring it to me,\'94 he said.\
\
9. Then, as their father had told them to, the sons broke them off and carried them off to where their father was. [1]\
\
10. \'93Now each of you try to bend and snap the sticks you broke off,\'94 he said.\
\
11. At this point, when the sticks they had each broken off were bent, they immediately snapped 
\i crack-crack
\i0  [2].\
\
12. So then he sent them to break off [sticks] again.\
\
13. Having sent all his sons to go back again to break off [sticks] to carry back, they set them down before \
      their father.\
\
14. This time the father tied them nicely together, then he had them bend [the bundle], one after the other.\
\
15. Even though one [son] after the other bent it, it wouldn\'92t snap.\
\
16. Then the father said, \'93My sons, if each of you stays by himself, just the same as a while ago, with \
      the breaking of those sticks, you will be destroyed.  You will have to fail [in life],\'94 he said.\
\
17. \'93But just as when you bent them again this time, if you all stick together and are united in feelings \
      with each other [3], even if others should try to harm you, you will not be destroyed,\'94 he said.\
\
18. Well, it\'92s just the same with us Christians too.\
\
19. If we put our trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, we will achieve everlasting life. [4].\
\
20. If we do not place faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, we will fall into temptations to sin.\
\
21. Therefore I would like to sing a little song about how if we put our trust in the lord Jesus Christ, the \
      Precious Son of God, [5] we will achieve everlasting life:\
\
22. [sings] Do welcome gladly God\'92s Precious Son,\
	        And you will win Life Eternal.\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 :\
\
[1] The non-3p benefactive particle  
\b l
\f1 \'e2
\f0   
\b0 is used here, apparently to situate the action from the father's receptive\
     point of view, i.e. 3p > 2p benefaction.\
[2] c
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 \u660 
\f0 -c
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 \u660 
\f0  (onomatopoeic adverb): sound of dry sticks breaking, mice munching paddy, etc. DL:485.\
[3] ni-ma t\'ea \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  t\'ed te ve: lit. \'93making only a single heart\'94.\
[4] co-t\'ec
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -ha-t\'ec
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : co...ha is a couplet used in elaborate expressions to mean 'life force; immortal soul' (see DL:479); \
     \b t\'ec
\f2 \uc0\u660\b0  
\f0 is a prefixable morpheme (ult. < Skt. \i divya\i0) meaning 'eternity; eternal abundance; something supernatural' \
     (see L:608-9).\
[5] y
\f1 \'e2
\f0 -phu-t\'ec
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : this  Christian expression contains the same morpheme \b t\'ec
\f2 \uc0\u660\b0  
\f0 as in the previous note.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}