{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11060\viewh18780\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #37 Song of Reconciliation of the Brother and Sister
\b0 \
1. Once upon a time, in Lahu country, in the land of Meh [1], there lived an older brother [2] and a younger sister [3], who used to divide up portions of game to eat.\
2. I\'92d just like to tell a little story about how they didn\'92t get along with each other.\
3. First the younger sister caught a great sambhur deer [4], which she brought [home] and properly shared out with her brother.\
4. Afterwards, the elder brother caught a porcupine [5].\
5. But then he didn\'92t share it with his sister.\
6. So the sister was very offended, and she went off downstream.\
7. The brother went off climbing upstream.\
8. One day they met each other again, and were so happy that they sang this little song:\
9. Sister: Only long ago could we live together\
	      Is that not so, oh, my brother!\
10. Brother: It is so, oh, my sister!\
11. Narrator: Indeed so! They hadn\'92t seen each other for ages! [6]\

\b Footnotes:
\b0 \
[1] 
\b m\'fb-m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0 -m\'ec-m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0\b0 : an elaborate expression built on 
\b m\'fb-m\'ec
\b0  \'91country\'92. This is the traditional former abode of the Lahu, in Yunnan. It is claimed that this land was called 
\b m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0\b0  because the Chinese Lahu used animals to plow their swiddens (
\b m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0  
\b0 \'91to plow\'92). In Thailand mountain fields (swiddens) are always cultivated by hand, unlike lowland wet-rice fields, where oxen and buffalo are used.\
[2]
\b  
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -u-ph\'e2
\b0 : an archaic kin term with a variety of related meanings: (1) older brother of a girl; (2) a girl\'92s mother\'92s brother; (3) wife\'92s brother; (4) man\'92s brother in law.  The basic meaning is \'91guardian of a young girl\'92.\
[3]  
\f1\b \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -n\'f9-m
\b0 a: Correlative of 
\f1\b \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -u-ph\'e2
\b0 . Archaic kin term meaning (1) sibling\'92s daughter/niece; (2) female word of an elder brother or maternal uncle.\
[4] 
\b kh
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f0 -y
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u772 
\f0\b0 : 
\i Cervus unicolor.
\i0 \
[5] 
\b f\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -pu
\b0 : Asiatic porcupine [
\i Hystrix brachyura
\i0 ].\
[6] Lit., \'93only long ago had they seen each other.\'94\
\
}