{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11580\viewh16780\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 #39 The Trickster\'92s Spear and the Traders\

\b0 \
1. Well, then, there was still another Trickster. [1]\
2. He put down a packet of rice on the lower part of a road.\
3. On the upper part of the road he put a packet of curry. [2]\
4. When he was ambling along carrying a spear, a band of traders came \
    along, and [he said to them]:\
5. \'93Hey you guys, don\'92t do any [other] trading now! [3]\
6. "Just trade me your things!\
7. "Let's trade this spear of mine for your belongings. I'll trade my spear \
     with you.\
8. "This spear of mine has magic powers! [4]\
9. "If you stick it down into the lower part of the road, you get rice to eat.\
10. "If you stick it down into the upper part of the road, you get meat to eat,\'94 \
      he said.\
11. So then those traders said \'93Let\'92s check it out!\'94, and when they did it,\
      when they stuck it into [the earth on] the lower part of the road, they got\
       a packet of rice.\
12. When they stuck it into the upper part of the road, they got a packet \
      of chicken.\
13. So then they were ecstatic, and they thought, \'93It\'92s true!\'94, and after\
      the Orphan had obtained their horses and had fled, \
      when that band of traders got hungry at noontime, they thrust that \
      spear down into the lower part of the road, but they didn\'92t get anything.\
14. When they thrust it into the upper part of the road they got nothing either.\
15. So when this happened they wept and went back home.\
\
Footnotes:\
[1] I.e., \'93here\'92s another Trickster story.\'94 The Trickster is here referred to \
     either by his name (
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -qh
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  ~ 
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -qhay) or as \'93the orphan\'94 (sentence \
     #13, below). The wily orphan is one of Trickster\'92s manifestations. \
    The hapless group of (Chinese) traders is another stock motif of these stories.\
[2] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 -ch\'ee (lit. \'93rice-enhancer, rice-elevator\'94): that which is eaten with \
     rice, conventionally translated \'91curry\'92. Cf. Thai 
\i k\'e0pkh\'e2aw
\i0 .\
[3] Instead of the usual negative imperative adverb 
\b t\'e2
\b0 , Trickster here uses\
     the clause-final verb-particle 
\b m\'e2-y
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0\b0 , which conveys a brusque or \
     ironic impression. See DL:974.\
[4] c
\f2 \'e2
\f0 -t\'ec
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -d
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 -t\'ec
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : lit. "eat-magic-drink-magic", i.e. 'an eternal abundance of \
     food and drink'.\
}