{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\author Chundra Cathcart}}\margl1134\margr1134\margb1134\margt1134\vieww17000\viewh20240\viewkind0
\deftab709
\pard\pardeftab709\qc

\f0\fs38 \cf0 	
\i\b The Trickster and the Village Women
\i0\b0 \
\
I\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
(1) Once upon a time the Lahu were fighting a war with the Chinese.[1] \
\
(2) Well, on a certain morning, the morning for going off to war, people were selected[2] and they went off. \
\
(3) [But] while others had made rice-packets [3] for themselves, this fellow 
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0\i -qh
\f1\i0 \uc0\u603 
\f0 \uc0\u768 [4] had wrapped up a sparse-feathered little chicken[5] to take with him, and on the road, when they ate, when it was time to eat, he unwrapped it and made as if to eat his meal. \
\
(4) As he unwrapped it and the little chick hopped right out, he said, Oh, dear, I mustn't go [with you]! You all go [on ahead without me]! As for me, since I've seen this omen,[6] I\'92m going home. I can\'92t possibly fight a war now. See you guys later!\'94[7] \
\
(5) And so the others let him go back.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 II\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
(6) Then, when they had let him go back, he ripped open a bumblebee\'92s nest [8], scooped out some crabs [9], and tied them so they dangled from a bamboo-sheath [10], and placed this [all] outside the house [of a certain woman]. \
\
(7) Then when night fell [11], and [the bees went] 
\i bzz-bzz-bzz 
\i0 and [the crab] went scratching 
\i teh-teh 
\i0 against the bamboo-tube\uc0\u8213 er, bamboo-sheath [12], Trickster said to the woman, \'93Aha, the spirits of your husbands [13] have come back to you! Don\'92t stay here any more! It\'92s too scary!\'94\
\
(8) So they all went trooping over to the Trickster\'92s house to sleep.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 III\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
(9) Then that Trickster said, \'93Oh, come now, don\'92t sleep at my house. Your kids will shit all over everything.\'94 \
\
(10) So then they swore to him, saying, \'93Oh, no, we won\'92t let them shit. We guarantee [14] it!,\'94 and they were allowed to sleep at Trickster\'92s house. \
\
(11) Then, after the bunch of women fell asleep, the Trickster thoroughly mashed up some shitbeans [15], squeezed [the paste] into balls, and smeared it on the rear ends of all the children who were there.\
\
(12) When dawn broke he said, \'93Just look at the way your kids have crapped up my whole house! [16] What will you give me as compensation?\'94 [17], and they said, \'93Oh, any compensation at all! Whatever you want to take, take!,\'94 but when they offered him money he wouldn\'92t take it. \
\
(13) No matter what they offered, he wouldn\'92t take it.\
	\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 IV\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 (14) Then the Trickster said to the bunch of women, \'93Well, go and beat on the Hollow A-yaw Tree [18], and listen [to what it tells you].\'94 [19]\
\
(15) In order to go beat on that Hollow A-yaw Tree-oracle, he made the women take the long way around. \
\
(16) The Trickster himself [20] went by the straight road, and got inside of the Hollow A-yaw, and the women tried beating on the outside, going 
\i thump-thump, 
\i0 saying, \'93What sort of compensation shall we give to Trickster?\'94 \
\
(17) And the Trickster said [21], \'93Ah, give him compensation, give him compensation!\'94 \
\
(18) So they went back home again. \
\
(19) The Trickster also ran back after the women as fast as he could, [so he was] sitting in his house [when they got there], and said, \'93Well, what did it say to you?,\'94 and they said, \'93Well, all it said was, \'91Give compensation to Trickster!\'92\'94\
\
(20) \'93Well, then,\'94 he said, \'93unless you beat on it once more, you won\'92t know [what to do],\'94 so again they [went to] beat on it and ask it [a question]\uc0\u8213 the Trickster had quickly gotten inside of it again\u8213 and the women in a body beat on it,
\i  thump-thump, 
\i0 and it said, \'93Oh, give him cunt, give him cunt!\'94 [22]\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural

\i \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural

\i0 \cf0 (21) At this the bunch of women ran back home, and the Trickster also rand back fast, and sitting in his house working this time with strips of rattan he said, \'93Well, what did it say? What did it tell you?\'94 and they said, \'93Well, Trickster\uc0\u8213 it just said, \'91Give him cunt, give him cunt!\'92\'94\
\
(22) Whereupon Trickster proceeded to fuck [23] every single woman in the village, one after the other. [24]\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 V\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 (23) Well, when all their husbands came back [from the war], they said, \'93Oh, Trickster did this and that to us! After you all were gone, Trickster fucked us!,\'94 so straightaway, as soon as all the husbands were back, they chased after Trickster trying to kill him, and he ran away. \
\
(24) He ran away and they chased him, but they couldn\'92t catch him. \
\
(25) No matter how they chased him they couldn\'92t catch him. \
\
(26) Unsuccessful once again, they came back home, while this Trickster, this guy [25], he scooped out some honey [26] and smeared himself with it, and then [27] he went and lay down inside a storage basket [28] in a cotton-house [29], then when they saw him in the joss-stick temple [30] they said, \'93Oh, the god has appeared to us today!\'94 [31]\
\
(27) So they made offerings to him. \
\
(28) When they gave him the food he ate it. \
\
(29) When he did this [32], they thought \'93It\'92s only the Trickster!,\'94 realizing it all of a sudden, so they grabbed him and tried to beat him to death, but again he ran away.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 VI	\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
(30) Again they chased him, and oh, this time they were chasing and chasing him, he pulled out his penis and skinned back his foreskin [33], and scratched together some leaves to cover himself, and made his penis all stiff and straight [34], and they said, \'93Well, Trickster\'92s trail has petered out now! [35]  And here\'92s a red phalloides mushroom [36] that has sprouted.\'94 \
\
(31) After this they went home.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 VII\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 (32) After they went home, the Trickster went back again too, and this time when they were chasing him, this guy, this Trickster, he managed to climb up into a big clump of trees. [37]\
\
(33) When he had gotten to the top of a big tree, at that point, as they chopped away at it, trying to get it to fall into the river down below, he said, \'93Oh, in my position [38], if you would only chop so that I fall into the water down there, I\'92d be able to swim back out and I wouldn\'92t die. \
\
(34) [But] if you chop me [39] so I land on that rocky cliff up there, I\'92d surely be smashed to smithereens! [40] I would die!\'94 \
\
(35) And so they chopped it in such a way that its fall was broken [41] by the cliff up there, and he managed to escape into a cave in the rocks.
\i \

\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 VIII\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
(36) Then, when the Trickster had gone into the cave up there, the others blew smoke [42] inside with all their might. \
\
(37) But try as they would, they couldn\'92t get it to blow inside. \
\
(38) He had taken off his shirt and was fanning it out again\uc0\u8213 from where he was, inside there. \
\
(39) They poked in sticks\uc0\u8213 they kept hacking off sticks and poking them inside. \
\
(40) So the Trickster took a shit and smeared it on the sticks, and it sta-a-nk [43] like hell, and they said, \'93Aha, the Trickster\'92s shit is coming out of him now! He\'92s dead!,\'94 and they set a falling-log trap [
\f2 44] 
\f0 and went back home.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 IX\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 (41) After this, the Trickster took up the jewsharp [45] he had carried with him, and blew on it with gusto [46], and early the next morning two young girls came to have a look, and when they heard the sound of the Trickster playing the jewsharp, they said, \'93Yoo-hoo [47], Trickster, please let the two of us come in!\'94 \
\
(42) Then he said, \'93Well, then, let the one who is truly uglier come in first,\'94 and when the one who was truly uglier came in first, she was crushed to death. [48]\
\
(43) Thereupon the Trickster managed to escape outside once more.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 X\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 (44) Then, again they chased and chased him, and for once they caught him.\
\
(45) When they caught him they tied him to the ass of a water-buffalo, and dragged them along [49]. \
\
(46) Then they bent his face over downwards and dragged him over a piece of rocky ground, and he said \'93A-lo, a-lo, a-lo!\'94 \
\
(47) Then they dragged him over some grassy ground, and he said \'93A-lo, a-lo, a-lo!\'94 \
\
(48) And when they dragged him [again] over the rocks they said, \'93Serves you right, serves you right, serves you right!\'94 [50]\
\
(49) [But] he didn\'92t die.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 XI\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 (50) Again he managed to get out, and once more they chased after him. \
\
(51) Once they had seized hold of him, they tied him so he hung underneath a big bridge over the water, some distance away. \
\
(52) After they had left him strung up there, at that point, a large group of traders [51] came along. \
\
(53) And they said, \'93Hey, Trickster! [52] What are you doing there under the bridge? [53],\'94 and he said to that bunch of Chinese, \'93Since my eyes are sore, my eyes are \'91imbibing the essence!\'92\'94 [54]\
\
(54) \'93Well, we would like to imbibe it also, Trickster!\'94 they said, and he said, \'93Let me loose then!\'94 \
\
(55) So they let him loose, and he got free.\
\
(56) Now that group of traders had been driving their mules, horses, and elephants around to the villages, having come to trade them. \
\
(57) Since they all happened to have sore eyes [55], he tied them up, and as they were trying to \'93imbibe the essence of the water\'94 under there, under the bridge, he cut them down so they fell in and died, and Trickster got away with all their goods, their silver and their gold.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\qc
\cf0 XII\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
(58) After this he went back, and when he had returned to his home again they said, \'93Oh, Trickster, how did you get [all this]? How did it happen that you got so much silver and gold even though we tried to kill you?,\'94 and he said, \'93Well, I just got it by \'91imbibing the essence\'92 of the water! [56] Since it was you all who did this for me.\'94 [57]\
\
(59) Then they said, \'93Oh, we\'92d like to get it too!,\'94 so he led them away, making each man carry with him to that place a pickling-tub [58] as big as a forehead-basket [59], and he strung them up there underneath [the bridge], and after the people had gotten inside [their tubs],he slowly released the ropes and made them fall into the water. \
\
(60) Immediately he made them sink down into the water, and they thrashed around furiously.
\i \

\i0 \
(61) Then, since there was one old codger who hadn\'92t gone in, he said to him, \'93There, there, there, look! The others are fighting with each other over the gold!,\'94 so he jumped in too, and [Trickster] cut through [the ropes], and after the whole villageful [of men] had died, he got the women of all the people in the village for himself.\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f3\fs48 \cf0 [1] This story, although recorded in Northern Thailand in 1965, dates from the faraway time when the ancestors of these Thailand Lahu were living in close contact with the Chinese. The Chinese by no means always came out ahead in conflicts with the once fierce Loloish tribes of Yunnan, and it was common for some Lolo groups to keep Chinese war prisoners as slaves. Most of the Lahu people still live in China.\
\
[2] The Lahu now in Thailand are all quite recent immigrants from Shan State in Burma, where they have been living for centuries as they slowly filtered southward from their ancestral homeland  on the Yunnan-Tibet border. It is likely that it was the Shan (a Tai people) who did the conscripting of recruits for military service in skirmishes against the Chinese. There are still many more Lahu living in Shan State than in Thailand.\
\
[3] The usual wayfarer's food is a cake of steamed rice wrapped in a banana leaf.\
[4] This is the Trickster's proper name. It is sometimes pronounced more like 
\fs46 \uc0\u603 \u768 -qh\'e0y
\fs96  
\fs48 or
\fs96  
\fs48 \uc0\u603 \u768 -qh\'e0n.\
\
[5] \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 -q\'fa-ni: 'a kind of tailless chicken without breast feathers', lit. "naked chicken"
\fs54 \

\fs48 (\uc0\u596 \u768 -q\'fa-ni 'something naked').\
\
[6] According to traditional Lahu belief, anything unusual or scary that happens on a journey is taken as an evil omen, and as a persuasive reason to go back home.\
\
[7] The expression 
\fs50 q\'f2\uc0\u660  e \'9a\u97 \u772 
\fs48  , lit. "I shall go back", is a common Lahu formula for leave-takings.\
\
[8] p\uc0\u603 \u770 -\u103 \u776 \'f9-li 'bumblebees'. They live in holes in rotting trees, one insect per hole. The Trickster must have put the bees into some kind of container, though the narrator doesn't bother to say this.\
\
[9] From a body of water nearby.\
\
[10] 
\fs44 v\'e2-l\uc0\u603 \u769 -q\'f4\u660 : 'a crinkly covering adhering to the surface of young bamboo plants.' Trickster selected this material for the noise it would make when scratched.\
\
[11] 
\fs46 m\'fb ph\uc0\u601 \u768 \u660  ve: lit., "the sky is revealed", is the Lahu idiom for night falling. The idea seems to be that only at night is the sky revealed for what it really is, a black star-studded expanse. 
\fs44 ph\uc0\u601 \u768 \u660 
\fs46  is the same verb as 'unwrap' (sentence (3) above).
\fs56  \
\

\fs46 [12]
\fs44   The narrator momentarily misspoke himself, saying first 
\fs46 v\'e2-d\uc0\u603 \u769 -q\u111 \u772 
\fs44  'tube of bamboo' instead of v\'e2-l\uc0\u603 \u769 -q\'f4\u660 .\
\
[13] The Trickster is now talking to all the jittery women of the village, who have evidently all come running out of their houses. He uses the expression 
\fs46 n\uc0\u596 \u768 -h\u616  \u596 \u768 -p\u97 \u772 
\fs44  'your (p.) husbands'. 
\fs46 \uc0\u596 \u768 -p\u97 \u772 
\fs44 , lit. "a male", is a slightly pejorative term for husband, since the ordinary word in Black Lahu is 
\fs46 \uc0\u596 \u768 -ph\u596 \u770 
\fs44 .\
\
[14] The women use the rather high-flown loanword 
\fs46 l\'e2\uc0\u660 -l\u596 
\fs44  'guarantee' (cf. Thai r\'e1pr\uc0\u596 \u596 \u331 ), which adds to the comic effect.\
\
[15] n\uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 -qh\u603 \u770 , lit. "shit-beans", are fermented soybeans made into paste or cakes and often eaten fried with vegetables and ginger. The name arises from its dark brown color, its consistency, and its pungent odor. This is also called n\u596 \u770 \u660 -k\u616 \u770 , lit. "rotten beans", which is also the literal meaning of its Burmese name p\'ea-pou\u660  (Written Burmese  p\'e2i-pup).\
\
[16] qh\uc0\u603 \u770  q\'f2 k\u601 , lit. "shit into". The verb k\u601  'insert' is sometimes used as an auxiliary verb to indicate thorough, penetrating action. The phrase 'my whole house' is an attempt to render this in English.\
\
[17] \'9a\uc0\u97 \u772 y (or \'9a\u603 \u772 ) 'pay compensation' is another legalistic loanword from Tai (cf. Siamese c\'e0aj) 'pay'.\
\
[18] a-y\uc0\u596 -q\u111 \u772  'hollow a-y\u596  tree'. The a-y\u596  (either 
\i Lagerstroemia cylindrica 
\i0 or 
\i L. macrocarpa
\i0 ) is one of the four 'master trees' (\'9a\uc0\u616 \u770 \u660 -j\u596 \u770 -m\u596 \u770 ) of Lahu tradition. It is a very tall, straight tree, believed especially apt to be hit by lightning.\
\
[19] The whole complex verbal idea, 'beat on and listen to what it says', is conveyed by the concise two-verb concatenation d\uc0\u596 \u770 \u660  na 'beat' + 'listen'. It could equally well be translated 'beat on and ask it [a question]', since the verb na, like Japanese 
\i kiku
\i0 , can mean either 'ask' or 'listen to', according to context.\
\
[20] \uc0\u603 \u768 -qh\u603 \u768  chi, lit. "this Trickster", here translated 'the Trickster himself'. The determiner chi 'this' and the demonstrative \'f4-ve 'that' are sometimes interchangeable as anaphoric markers, and are usually both translated simply as 'the'. (The narrator tends to alternate them for variety.)\
\
[21] No doubt in a disguised "oracular" voice, though the story-teller made no effort to reproduce this in his narration.\
\
[22] cha 'female pudenda, vagina, cunt'. Lahu has no euphemisms for human sexual organs or excretory functions. cha (or cha-p\uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 ), like n\u105 \u772  or n\u105 \u772 -qh\u603 \u768 \u660 
\fs56  
\fs44 'male genitalia, penis, cock', is plain-spoken, neither medical, circumlocutory, nor vulgar.\
\
[23] p\'e0\uc0\u660  'copulate, have intercourse with, fuck'. See preceding note.\
\
[24] y\'e2-m\'ee-ma t\'ea qh\'e2\uc0\u660 -qh\'e2\u660  ve: the meaning 'every woman in the village' is conveyed by the reduplication of qh\'e2\u660  'village'. The idea 'one after the other' is provided by the auxiliary verb ph\'f4\u660        'perform an action as one of a group; perform several similar actions.' As a main verb ph\'f4\u660  means 'to pile up; make a heap'.\
\
[25] The story-teller uses a succession of two topic noun-phrases in apposition, both to establish sufficient contrast with the ineffectual actions of the husbands, and to give himself a bit of breathing space before launching into the rapid series of clauses which are to follow in the same sentence.\
\
[26] Presumably from a nearby tree with a bees' nest. The economy of detail the story-teller permits himself is possible because his whole audience (except for the poor recording linguist) had already heard the story many times before.\
\
[27] Instead of 'and then', the phrase qhe te \'9a\uc0\u101 \u772  l\u603 -\u596 \u772  could be translated 'having done this'. The presence of the verb-particle \'9a\u101 \u772  'prerequisite action' makes this expression "verbier" than the lexicalized conjunction qhe-te-l\u603  which occurs so often in this text.\
\
[28]  th\uc0\u603 -q\u111 \u772  or ph\u603 -q\u111 \u772 : a huge basket, often taller than a man and several feet in diameter, used for storing paddy or other harvested crops.\
\
[29] \'9a\'e1-l\'e2-y\uc0\u603 \u768 : an outbuilding where cotton was stored. The cotton sticking to the honey gave the Trickster a sort of tarred-and-feathered appearance, so that he looked like something "out of this world".\
\
[30] \'9aa-t\'fa-k\uc0\u616 \u768 -y\u603 \u768 : lit. "incense-burn-place-house", a building where there was an altar for burning incense sticks. Lahu animists burn incense and candles to honor the supreme supernatural\
\uc0\u103 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa, the last syllable of whose name seems to be related to the morpheme \'9aa 'joss-stick, incense-stick'. The Pidgin English word 
\i joss
\i0 , meaning 'idol, cult-image', itself derives ultimately from Portuguese 
\i deos
\i0  'god'.\
\
[31] \uc0\u103 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa, here translated 'the god', is the Great Spirit of Lahu animist religion, conceived of as an incorporeal and abstract being far above the nature-spirits, who are rather stupid and often malevolent. \u103 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa has his own priests, who enjoy higher status in the community than the "spirit-doctors" who deal with the n\'ea or nature-spirits. It was relatively natural for the missionaries to adapt the notion of \u103 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa to apply to the "Christian God".\
\
[32] A real god is supposed to inhale merely the "breath" or essence (\'9a\'e1, \uc0\u596 \u768 -\'9a\'e1) of a food-offering, so Trickster is revealed as a non-divine being. This incident is reversed symbolically at the end of the story, where Trickster claims to have made his fortune by "imbibing the essence" of the water-- thus indirectly proclaiming himself to be a god.\
\
[33] n\uc0\u105 \u772  q\u603 \u769  ve: 'retract the foreskin'. q\u603 \u769  means 'to extract through a narrow opening.' It is also used, e.g., for removing mucus from the nose.\
\
[34] So that only his glans protruded through the covering of leaves. (It is to be noted that English 
\i glans
\i0  is itself a metaphorical extension of a plant-name, "acorn".)\
\
[35] The reader will perhaps forgive this pun. The literal meaning of this sentence is "There is no long any way to chase after Trickster's trail".\
\
[36]  m\'f9-n\'ed-\uc0\u103 \u776 \u596  or m\'f9-n\'ed-\u103 \u776 w\u603 : a kind of tasty ground mushroom with a red cap resembling a glans penis. The 2nd syllable n\'ed means 'red', but recalls the homophonous (except for tone) n\u105 \u772  'penis'.    m\'f9 means 'mushroom' and \u103 \u776 \u596  means 'round'. "Red phalloides" is a feeble attempt to render this phytonym in English.\
\
[37] \'9a\uc0\u616 \u770 \u660 -c\u603 \u768  \u596 \u768 -pu-l\'f3 'big clump of trees'. The narrator amends this to \'9a\u616 \u770 \u660 -c\u603 \u768 -l\'f3 'a big tree', when this clause is "chain-repeated" in the next sentence.\
\
[38] This renders \uc0\u331 \'e0 l\u603 \u768 , lit. "as for me", a strongly topicalized 1st person pronoun.\
\
[39] The verb thu 'chop down' is here construed with a personal direct object, although it is much more usual to have 'tree' as its object. This is preserved in the translation, and in fact reinforces the symbolic psychosexual meaning of the chopping, i.e. an attempt at castration of the potent by the impotent.\
\
[40] n\uc0\u603 \u770 \u660 -k\'e0\u660  qay ve 'go smash; get smashed to smithereens'. n\u603 \u770 \u660 -k\'e0\u660  is one of a class or morphemes that forms vivid adverbial expressions with the verb qay 'go', much like English 'go kaputt', 'go blooey', etc.\
\
[41] \uc0\u331 \u603  p\'ee: \u331 \u603  'lean on', p\'ee 'give; causative auxiliary', i.e. 'cause to lean against; cause to be propped up on'.\
\
[42] The Lahu says 'blew fire inside', although \'e0-m\uc0\u105 \u772  'fire' must be translated as 'smoke' for clarity in English. Burning brush at the mouth of a cave is a common method for smoking animals out, or of asphyxiating them so they can be removed after they die.\
\
[43] The verb n\'f9 'stink' is pronounced with exaggerated drawled intonation.\
\
[44] va-t\uc0\u603 \u770  'falling-log trap': a delicately contrived trap which the animal springs by stepping on a board which instantaneously activates a series of rods, the last of which releases a heavy log. The husbands, although they believe Trickster to be dead, leave this trap at the mouth of the cave as a precautionary measure. Since the trap was set up outside the cave, k\u601  does not have its literal meaning "insert" here, but its more abstract meaning of 'in such a way that the verbal action penetrates its goal'.\
\
[45] \'e1-th\'e2 'jewsharp': a pair of supple bamboo strips with thin reeds and notes a fourth apart, which the player blows on while flicking the ends up and down. The two notes are alternated an iterated with considerable rhythmic complexity. This instrument is used mostly in courtship. Technically \'e1-y\uc0\u603 \u770  refers to a slightly different kind of instrument with its strips tuned an octave apart. \'e1-th\'e2-\'e1-y\u603 \u770  sometimes means 'jewsharps of both kinds', but here it is simply a more sonorous synonym of  \
\'e1-th\'e2.\
\
[46] 'With gusto' translates the emphatic particle qha, as well as the drawled intonation on the following concatenative particle l\uc0\u603 .\
\
[47] 'Yoo-hoo" was chosen to render the Lahu vocative particle \'f2 , since its "Blondie-and-Dagwood" quality suggests the empty-headedness that the girls display.\
\
[48] It is hard to understand the girls' docile stupidity here. From our point of view it should have been more effective for Trickster to have said, "Let the prettier one of you come in first." Then presumably they would have vied for the honor of being first. One can only conclude that the girls were so much under Trickster's spell that they obeyed him literally, making an objective assessment of who was uglier.\
\
[49] \uc0\u103 \u776 \u596 \u768 -\'9a\u603 , lit. "drag-lead". Here \u103 \u776 \u596 \u768  is used in its literal sense of "drag", and not merely as an enlivener of the verbal idea. It is immaterial whether we take the unexpressed object to be the buffalo or the Trickster, since they are tied together.\
\
[50] The interjection q\'e2-c\'e0\uc0\u660  is used to gloat at somebody's discomfiture. The story-teller emphasizes Trickster's plight so that the audience can fully enjoy it, but he won't be kept down for long. This episode, among its other functions in the story, serves to put Trickster's ultimate triumph into higher relief.\
\
[51] As we soon find out, these were Chinese traveling traders. This provides an interesting symmetry with the beginning of the story, where the men are going off to fight the Chinese. Evidently the confrontation with the Chinese operated at many levels in ancestral Lahuland.\
\
[52] Note that the traders recognize the Trickster without ever having been introduced to him. Trickster is larger than life and known to everybody.\
\
[53] This could equally well be translated 'Why are you under the bridge?', since the usual Lahu way of saying 'why' (\'e0-th\'f2\uc0\u660 -ma te l\u603 ) means literally "doing what?"\
\
[54] \'9a\'e1 m\uc0\u616 \u768  ve, here translated 'imbibing the essence', is an expression of key symbolic importance in the story. It does not occur in ordinary speech, and is clearly meant to be pregnant with meaning.\
\'9a\'e1 means 'air, breeze, vapor; breath; vital force, spirit, energy'. The verb m\uc0\u616 \u768  means 'to pass air noisily through the mouth or nose", as in \u601 \u770 \u660 -m\u616 \u768  ve 'hiccup', \u601 \u768 \u660  m\u616 \u768  ve 'belch', qa-m\u616 \u768  ve 'sing', t\'ed-\'9a\'ee\u660  m\u616 \u768  ve 'whistle', h\'e1-m\u616 \u768  ve 'yawn', h\'e1-th\'ee m\u616 \u768  ve 'sneeze'.\
\
[55] Due to the long dusty roads they had to travel. Trickster had alertly noticed that their eyes were red.\
\
[56] With this remark the Trickster is indirectly revealing himself to be a god, for only gods can live off the incorporeal essence of things. This is a symbolic inversion of the incident above, where he was found out 
\i not
\i0  to be a god when he ate the substance of the food-offerings in the temple.\
\
[57] n\uc0\u596 \u768 -h\u616  te \'e1 l\'e2 l\u603 : the particle l\'e2 indicates action that benefits a non-3rd person (in this case 2nd person benefitting 1st person). Trickster is pretending to be grateful to the husbands for having strung him up under the bridge.\
\
[58] \'ed-m\'fb-q\uc0\u111 \u772 : a large-mouthed vessel made of earth, sand, and cement, used for pickling.\
\
[59] qh\'e1-j\uc0\u117 \u772 -lu: a deep loosely woven basket used for transporting water-gourds, carried by a tumpline around the forehead so that the hands are left free.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}