{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12520\viewh20240\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 #60 The Six Stupid Men and the Gophers\
\

\b0 1. Once upon a time six stupid men went to dig up gophers [1].\
\
2. Having dug for gophers, they caught seven of them.\
\
3. So after they caught the seven animals, they proceeded to divide them up.\
\
4. As they were dividing them up, one person sat in the middle and said, \'93Here, one for you; here, one for you; here, one for that guy; here, one for that other guy\'94\'97dividing them up like this, the six people got six of the animals, but one was left over.\
\
5. So then when they repeated it again like this, dividing them up again, still exactly one animal was left over.\
\
6. When one of the guys [2] took the one that was left over, he had two of them.\
\
7. So they divided it up still again.\
\
8. But even after they divided it again, [the last] guy got the two animals that were left.\
\
9. So all the livelong day [3] they kept on dividing up the gophers this way, until they were all quarreling with each other.\
\
10. Since they were acting this way, they took a very long time doing it, when all of a sudden a hunter appeared.\
\
11. When this hunter appeared, he said, \'93Hey stupids, what are you all doing?\'94 When he asked them this, they said, \'93We\'92re dividing up these gophers, but we can\'92t agree about it, so we\'92re offending each other like this.\'94\
\
12. So the hunter said, \'93Bring them to me, all the gophers!\'94 When he said this they brought them together in one place.\
\
13. The hunter quickly divided them up, saying, \'93Here, one for you; one for that guy; one for that other guy,\'94 and after he had divided up six of the animals among the six people, the hunter took the remaining one for himself.\
\
14. So then those six fools said, \'93Now this is they way that a person who knows how to divide does it!\'94, and they were very happy.\
\
15. Ha, ha, ha!\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 :\
\
[1] f\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -ph\'ee: \'91gopher; bamboo rat\'92 [
\i Rhizomys sumatrensis
\i0 ]\
\
[2] t\'ea 
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2 ph\'e2 'one of the guys' is a slangy way of saying ch
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0  t\'ea 
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2 'one person'.\
     \
[3] t\'ea-ni-t\'e2-v\'e2: t\'ea ni \'91all day\'92 + t\'e2-v\'e2 \'91id.\'92 < Tai (Si. th\'e1\uc0\u331  wan).  The two equivalent expressions are juxtaposed for emphasis.}