{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15240\viewh21340\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 #66. Candid Conversation: preparing to be recorded
\b0 \
\
C\'e0-l
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 : [CL]			1. Hurry up and do it!\
Headman\'92s wife [HW]:	2. I\'92ll bring my dog and have him go at it for you!\
Somebody:                      3. Bring your dog and come put him down here [1] for us!\
HW: 				4.  The dogs are right outside, a big pack of them.\
Headman [H]: 			5a. Come on, come on, you guys have nothing to be bashful about!\
					5b. They [2] say they want to get stuff.\
					5c. When it\'92s time for him to go back to America\'97our Lahu way of life.\
					5d. Anything and everything, [3] all kinds of things.\
					5e. Like, we could pretend to be bachelors [4]: \'93I wonder if we should go down 					there to pitch a little woo\'94 [5], \'93If we go down there there\'92s not going to be any 					place to flirt,\'94 one guy can say, and the other one can say, \'93Over there you\'92ve 					got to wait! You\'92d have to stay down there a long time.\'94\
CL: 6. Tell a little bit about the Kachin [6] looking for a wife!  Why is he looking for one, I wonder?\
      			<Woman laughs>\
H:  7a. I hear the Jingpho is coming back from looking for a wife. [7]\
      7b. You [8] stay at home and pound lots of rice and store it, and when he gets back you can eat \
            it  up\'97say something like that.\
CL: 8.  Will he get one, or won\'92t he\'97think about that, and talk nicely about it!\
H:   9a. Hey, hurry up and do it, hurry up, you guys! About everything\'97\
       9b. Well then, I\'92m going to roll me up one of those great big Kl\'e8t-Thawng [9] cigars like you\'92ve seen\
             the lunatics smoke\'97\
       9c. In the old days in Shan State we used to smoke great big cheroots that would fill your mouth \
             right up!\
CL: 10. Were they what was called 
\b hs\'eai-py\'een-lei
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  [10]? Or were they called 
\b hs\'eai-p
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 '
\f0 -lei
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 ? [11]\
H:   11. Cigars\'97big cigars. Now I\'92m going to roll me a big one!\
CL: 12. Go for it!\
Woman:13. They\'92re doing it, I tell you! It\'92s already turned on [12]! Hurry up and put something in\
                    it! [13]\
Kid: 14. Great big Kl\'e8t-Thawng cigars.\
H:    15a. Hmm. Come on, hurry up and come do it! About all kinds of stuff.\
        15b. Everything about courting the girls\'97say \'93That girl is waiting for you there!\'94\
        15c. Say \'93She\'92s hiding all your shoulderbags!\'94\
        15d. Say \'93She\'92s hiding your towels\'94! [14]\
CL:  16. Is that what goes on when the young women and young men [15] court each other? They \
              hide things from each other?\
H:    17. They hide things from each other. They take things and hide them. They hide towels from \
              each other.\
CL:  18. They don\'92t return them, do they, the things that they\'92ve hidden?\
H:    19. They don\'92t give them back. They buy very good gold rings to hand over [16] [to their betrothed].\
CL:  20. Uh-huh.\
H:    21. The girls\'92 things they hand over to us, and our things we hand over to them. Later on they \
              have  discussions about getting married.\
HW: 22a. Hurry up and record, they say. They say they\'92re going to take pictures.\
        22b. The next time they come, they\'92ll give them to us, they say.\
CL:  23. Hurry up and do it. Can\'92t you do it?\
H:    24a. Come and go at it, come and go at it, you guys!\
        24b. You could even talk Karen! [17]\
        24c. Hey, C\'e0-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 , why don\'92t you record something in Karen-Shmaren [18]!\
CL:  25. You can ask things like \'93How old are you?\'94, right?\
H:    26a. Hey, C\'e0-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 , shall we do it in 
\i Thai
\i0 ?! [19]\
        26b. Sit down here! We\'92ll talk White Man\'92s language [20]!\
        		<laughter>\
CL:  27. No need to be bashful! Just do it any old way\'97\
Boy: 28. Stop it! [21]\
CL: 29. It\'92s like playing.\
H:   30a. <sings> Mmm\'97
\i sol do la sol do la sol mi do mi re do re mi re sol la sol mi do sol la \
              do ti la sol
\i0   
\i\b <get the rhythm from the tape>\
       
\i0\b0 30b. Well, put in everything about the cocks crowing when women give birth!\
Somebody: 31. Let a woman do that then!\
H:   32. Put in how people long ago, how the Chinese for no reason at all drove us Lahu along \
             by force [22], how we fled down below that high plateau, and how afterwards we then \
             stayed down there in the valley where they attacked us again\'97how year after year we \
             were exhausted [by all that].\
CL: 33. Yes, do it just like that!\
H:   34a. Let us hear about how when we\'92re clear-cutting a swidden and a branch breaks off a \
              tree and knocks somebody over \'97\
       34b. That\'92s happened to everybody.\
       34c. C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 , come sit here! Come 
\f2 record
\f0  here!\
       34d. For ten liters of hulled rice figure out how many baht they ought to pay and sell it to them \
               at that price\'97say that!\
       34e.  These kids don\'92t want to help us\'97\
		<The young men keep fiddling with the guitar that JAM brought as a gift.>\
       34f.  Do it right, do it right! [23]\
       34g. Did you hear, [24] a while ago that was a pretty tune! <sings> 
\i la sol mi do do \uc0\u8593 
\i0  \
               [octave higher] 
\i la do ti la sol
\i0 .\
CL: 35. Hurry up and do it! Don\'92t you have anything to record finally?\
H:   36. Oh this bunch of kids are "going 
\b pu-l\'ee-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -l\'ee
\b0 " [25], so probably none of them will come up \
             with an idea.\
 			<laughter>\
CL: 37. What does \'93going 
\b pu-l\'ee-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -l\'ee
\b0 \'94 mean?\
			<much laughter>\
H:   38. So about 
\b pu-l\'ee-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -l\'ee
\b0 , right?\
CL: 39. Yeah.\
H:   40a. <making grotesque gestures> When your shins are like this, and your head, your face\'97like \
              this\'97that\'92s what we mean by 
\b pu-l\'ee-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -l\'ee
\b0  in Lahu.\
			<laughter>\
      40b. 
\b Pu-l\'ee-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -l\'ee
\b0  means \'93all bulging and pursed\'94\'97a pursed mouth\'97\
C\'e0-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : 41. You ask me things and I\'92ll answer you back\'97\'91Today where did you go?,\'92 \
                   \'91I went there\'92, \'91I went here\'92\'97\
CL:       42. Yes, that\'92s great, great!\
H:         43. Yes, okay, I\'92ll ask.\
C\'e0-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : 44. Is it already turned on? Has it been going like this the whole time? Can [our voices] enter \
                    it already?\
CL: 45a. Let this [tape] finish first. Then we\'92d like to put in a new one.\
       45b. [To me, in English] Do you want to start another one?\
JAM: 46. [In English] Ask them if they want to hear what they just said.\
				* * *\
CL:  47. Wait a second.  I\'92ll just put in a new one.\
H:    48. What\'92ll we do? Hunting? We\'92ve already recorded about hunting. Shall we do \
             \'93hunting  squirrels,\'94[26] C\'e0-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 ?\
CL: 49a. Let\'92s also do it about fighting wars!\
       49b. You\'92ve fought alongside 
\f2 [27
\f0 ] the Chinese, haven\'92t you?\
       49c. Like that time when we were fighting with Japan.\
       49d. Can\'92t you [talk about] the Japanese coming up [to Shan State] and the Thais coming up there, \
               and their fighting each other?\
       49e. The white men chased them out, and the Japanese fled, you can say.\
       49f. If it hadn\'92t been for so many airplanes coming like that\'97\
H: 50. <talking to the boys playing the guitar>\
        You tap on the upper part like this, there on the upper part [of the neck of the guitar] you press \
        upwards [i.e., higher up on the strings] or you press downwards.\
CL: 51a. Yeah, like this?\
       51b. The thing is you have to use all five [fingers], five of them.\
       51c. If you can do this you can earn a lot of money.\
       51d. People who do this in White Man\'92s country, in one night they get a thousand...  [28]]\
>END OF TAPE<\
\
Footnotes:\
[1] I.e., in front of the tape recorder.\
[2] I.e., my chief consultant C\'e0-l
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  (= Paul = Tcalo) and I.\
[3 
\b \'e0-th
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0 -m\'fb-th\'f2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -ma
\b0 : elaborate expression expanded from 
\b \'e0-th\'f2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -ma
\b0  \'91what?\'92; 
\b m\'fb
\b0  (B
\fs30 elab
\fs36 ) conveys \
     a nuance of intensity. See DL:1003-4.\
[4] 
\b ch
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 -h\'e1-p
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0\b0 : young man of marriageable age.\
[5] 
\b m\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  (V): \'91go courting; woo; flirt with the opposite sex (of men or women)'.\
[6] A Jingpho resident in Huey Tat, popular with his Lahu fellow villagers, who enjoy teasing him \
     gently. He is called either 
\b Kh\'e1-p
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0\b0  \'91Kachin\'92 or 
\b C\'f9nph
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0  
\b0 \'91Jingpho\'92\
[7] The Headman is addressing someone presumably living in the Jingpho\'92s house while he is on his quest.\
[8] Still talking to that person.\
[9] The Headman is ironically referring to his home-made cheroots wrapped in corn-husks as \
     
\b Kl\'e8t-Th
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u596 
\f0 \uc0\u331 
\b0  (lit. \'93Gold Flakes\'94), a popular brand of Thai cigarettes. It\'92s not clear who the \
     \'93lunatics\'94 are.\
[10]  WB 
\b ch\'ea-py\'e2\uc0\u331 -lip: 
\b0 a Burmese cigar or "cheroot".\
[11] WB 
\b ch\'ea-paw'-lip
\b0 : "a cheroot-like smoking article consisting of a filler of roasted tobacco plus \
       other ingredients and a filter encased in a cylinder of banap-leaf" (
\i Myanmar-English Dictionary
\i0 , \
       p. 134). A cheroot (ult. Tamil 
\i curru
\f2 \uc0\u7789 \u7789 
\f0 u
\i0  < 
\i curi
\i0  \'91be spiral\'92) is a cigar with square-cut ends.\
[12] 
\b ph
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0\b0 : lit. \'93open\'94. She is referring to the tape recorder.\
[13] I.e., record something!\
[14] 
\b ph\'e1-c\'e8
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 : < Shan (cf. Si. 
\b ph\'e2a-ch\'e9t-tua
\b0 , lit. \'93cloth-wipe-body\'94).\
[15] 
\b y\'e2-m\'ee-h\'e1
\b0  \'91marriageable young woman'.\
[16] Two phonologically similar verbs occur in this passage: 
\b f\'e1 
\b0 ~
\b  ph\'e1 
\b0 (< PLB 
\b *
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 wak
\b0 ) 'hide stag', and \
        
\b f\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  (< Tai) \'91hand over to, entrust to\'92.\
[17] 
\b y\'e2n-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -m\'fb-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0\b0 : 
\b m\'fb
\b0  is an intensive morpheme occurring in elaborate expressions. See note [3].\
[18] The Headman uses the slightly pejorative term 
\b Y\'e2n-q
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -l
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  for Karen. C\'e0-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  evidently can \
       speak some Karen.\
[19] 
\b Th\'e2y-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -m\'fb-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0\b0 : See notes 3 and 17.\
[20] 
\b K\'e2l\'e2-phu-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0\b0 : lit. \'93white people's\'92 language,\'94 usually referring to English.\
[21] Another kid has just poked him.\
[22] 
\f2\b \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -b
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f0\b0 : lit. \'93chase by shooting\'94.\
[23] He says this to the guitar players.\
[24] 
\b chi ni-
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 : lit. \'93look at this\'94.\
[25] 
\b pu-l\'ee-kh
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -l\'ee te ve
\b0  \'91have a moronic face; act like an idiot\'92. This expression was inadvertently left \
       out of DL.\
[26] 
\b f
\f2 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  'rodent' is here used to refer specifically to 
\b f\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -th
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f0\b0  'squirrel', the only rodent the \
       Lahu habitually hunt to eat.\
[27] Note different translations of the commutative noun-particle, g
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0  , which must be understood as 'alongside, on the same side as' in this sentence, but as the opposite, 'against' in the next sentence.\
[28] Presumably 1000 baht, then an unimaginably large sum of money for the villagers.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}