{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 AppleSymbols;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww16040\viewh14580\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Headman C\'e0-b\'ed (H) and C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  (C-)\
[Tape VI, Side 1]\
1 H: Well, what shall we do with ourselves today, C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  ?\
2 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Why, we can do whatever we please! [1]\
3 H: Well then, let's go hunting, shall we?\
4 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : We'll go hunting!\
5 H: Over there, above K\uc0\u603 \u768 -pa-t\'e2w\u660  [2] valley, we'll climb up and hunt above the Pu-p\u616 \u770  River, okay?\
6 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : I'd like to go, if that's where [we're going]. The squirrels--there are plenty of squirrels [3] there. Lots of barking-deer too.\
7 H: If you catch a barking-deer, do you plan to sell the meat?\
8 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Well, sure, of course I'll sell it.\
9 H: How much per kilo would you sell it for?\
10 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Oh, I probably wouldn't sell it for less than twelve baht a kilo.\
11 H: Hm--if you did get a barking-deer, you'd get back your investment in buying the gun, wouldn't you? \
12 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Sure, I certainly would get it back. \
13 H: Let's hunt then, let's hunt! Why don't you go around [tracking ][4] on that steep slope over there and force them down into that grove of m\uc0\u603 \u768 -\'9a\'e2 bamboo. I'll go and wait down there.\
14  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Okay, fine. I'll drive them down for you, all right! Hey, Blackie[6]! Hey! Hey! \
15 H: I haven't gotten there yet. Don't do it yet! Let me make my way down first.\
16  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Be careful now. Wow! There sure are lots of tracks [up here]!\
17 H: Okay, wind your way downward--down now.\
18  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Keep right on their trail down there!\
19 H: Drive 'em [down], drive 'em [down]!\
20  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Hey, hey! Hey, Blackie, Blackie! Hey, something's moving down there! Be careful now!\
21 H: Be quiet, be quiet, a barking-deer's coming down now.\
22  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : It's gone, it's gone.\
<Noise made by the deer, then the sound of the gun>\
23 H: Hey, now it's gone into the river down there--into the river!\
24  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : What is it?\
25 H: It's a big buck, I tell you, a buck.\
26  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Gee, it'll taste great today--when we boil it up and eat it!\
27 H: Oho, its hindquarters have gotten stuck right into the river-bed! Come on down, come on down! Come help me carry my gun. I can't lift it all by myself. [7]\
28  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Aw, you carry it by yourself! I can't do it now. I'm too tired. \
29 H: Just come on down first, down here.\
30 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : To where?\
31 H: It's below where you are now, below the clump of m\uc0\u603 \u768 -\'9a\'e2 bamboo, in the ravine. \
32 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Below here, huh?\
33 H: Yeah, down there, down there.\
34  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : The gulch is deep, you know! I can't make it.\
35 H: Come pick your way down the hill over on that side there. \
36  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : By way of that hill, you say?\
37 H: Yeah, by that peak--by that dark-colored one.\
38  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : I can't get down that ridge over there! The ground's too steep.\
39 H: [Use] the footholds, the footholds [8] -- there are elephant footprints like steps [going down the slope].\
40  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : If I make a false step, it's right down into the river!\
41 H: So look where you're going! You've got eyes.\
42  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Even with eyes I'm sure I'll fall! The ground's awfully steep.\
43 H: You won't fall, you won't fall. Just get to that clump of suckers over there, nice and slow--\
44  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : You're sure [9] then, are you? That I won't fall.\
45 H: Sure I'm sure!\
46  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : You can't be sure! You'll cause the death of a fellow-man! \
47 H: You won't die, you jerk! [10]\
48  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Otherwise even if you do get the animal, I won't live to eat it! \
49 H: You just stay up there on the mountaintop and wait. I'll carry it up for you, if that's the way you \
     want  it.\
50  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Well now, in that case I'll just sit myself down nicely up there for you. [11] Do be careful carrying it up here now, that thing down there! Shall I climb up there?\
51 H: Sit [12] and wait, sit and wait! I'll carry it for you, I'll carry it up for you.\
<The deer is brought up the mountain>\
52  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Wow, this barking  deer weighs as much as 1 kh\u596 \u769  [13] plus 5 baskets of paddy! It's heavy to carry. Isn't that right? \
53 H: Yes. It's one kh\uc0\u596 \u769  plus five basketful.  There's no doubt about it. [14]\
54  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : How many animals have you ever gotten--ones like this?\
55 H: Why, I've been shooting them down like this and eating them [for so long that] my teeth have turned yellow already!\
56  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : They're yellow because you smoke tobacco, more likely.\
57 H: I have tried smoking those great big Gold Flake [15] cigars, you know. \
58  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Your teeth are yellow because you smoke, I'd say!\
59 H: From eating barking-deer meat my teeth are all blocked up--there's white crud [16] stuck in the tips of my teeth.\
60  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : That can't be true! I'm awfully hungry today! Where shall we go to eat? Let's get with it and cut up the meat.\
61 H: I wrapped up [something to eat] and carried it along. A big packet of sticky rice. [17]\
62  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Give it here! Let's mix it up [with the meat] and eat it together. \
63 H: Mix it up to eat, mix it up to eat! Like what's between the legs of Na-\'9a\uc0\u616 \u769 's father! [18]. \
<laughter>\
64 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : It probably doesn't taste too good then. If you call your [food] by that name.\
65 H: It tastes good, I tell you! "Between the legs of Na-\'9a\uc0\u616 \u769 's father" just means a big fucker [19] of a cake, that's all.\
66  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : In a few minutes we'll get this meat cut up and we'll cook the headman's portion [20]. We'll sink our teeth [21] into it!\
67 H; Light a fire. Light a fire then.\
<A woman who was listening to the taping breaks in>: The headman's portion belongs to the elders!\
68 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Shall I make a fire?\
69 H: Mm-hm.\
70  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Gee, I don't have any pine-splinters. [22] It's hard as hell to get it lit, isn't it?\
71 H: Scratch us together some dry bamboo into a pile. Lay a big fire [23], strike a match, and set it ablaze. \
72  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : If it's really [done with] dry bamboo it won't taste good at all, I tell you.\
73 H: Don't let it get scorched in the fire. We'll get diarrhea! \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 <laughter>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 74  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : I'll push it in and 'tube-roast' [24] it then. I'll cut off a m\u603 \u768 -\'9a\'e2 bamboo tube over there--\
75 H: Better tie it to a stick and roast it, 'spit-roast' it! On a great big roasting-stick,[25] as long as your arm.\
76  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : When you spit-roast it, the wood makes it stink of soot! If you \ul tube\ulnone -roast it, then it's fine! \
77 H: Spit-roast it! Scrape (lit. 'beat') those embers over there [together into one place] and spit-roast it. \
78  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : In that case put some wood in, too. Right over there, then.\
79 H: Break off some dry m\uc0\u603 \u768 -p\u596 \u768  bamboo [26] and put it in. Pick up some dry m\u603 \u768 -p\u596 \u768 , some dry bamboo and put it in. \
<Sound of match being struck>\
80a  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Well, now, in a little while, it'll catch nicely and we'll have it cooked up, right?\
      H: Mm-hm.  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : When we're through eating in a few minutes, how shall we go back [to \
     the  village]? Why don't we do some more hunting on our way back? \
81 H: Let's go back hunting over there outside of Pa-ho village [27], in that narrow valley--over in those rattan thickets there. \
82  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : But if we're carrying the meat like this, we won't be able to go through any rattan thickets! \
83 H: [If you don't want to hunt anymore on the way back] you go on up there to the [easy] road along the mountain, while 
\i I
\i0  do some sneaky shooting [28] down below--then I'll pick up [what I've shot] and carry it up to you!\
84 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Ha! The way you do it all you can catch is birds! [29]\
85 H: I'll catch him, all right. [There's an animal / He's] sleeping down there at the river. Big as life, with a hard-on [30]!\
<laughter>\
86  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : You've got a foul mouth! [31]\
87 H: Don't I though!\
88  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Animals have sharp ears. Things like barking-deer [run away at the first sound]--because they don't have gall-bladders.[32] \
89 H: It's still way over there, the mountain after next. It's still far. He probably can't hear us.\
90 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : The mountain after next in that direction, eh?  H: Mm-hm. C\'e0-\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Nope. I bet you won't \
      be able to go quietly enough.\
91 H: I'll flit along softly on my little tippy-toes [33]!\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 <laughter>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 92  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Then your legs will get numb on you.\
93 H: I'll twist my steps as I walk on tiptoes. So that I practically turn my [calf-]muscles inside out.\
94  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : You can't almost turn your muscles inside out that way!\
95 H: Sure, I can actually [34] get my calf turned around to the front [of my leg]! You just watch as I go twisting along! \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 <laughter>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 96  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : What you say can't be true.[35]\
97 H: I'll go carefully this time, I tell you.\
98  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Well then, I'll try going [my way too], right? So I'll climb up there to the mountain slope, up along the road, and I'll wait for you up there then, okay?\
99 H: Watch me carefully. I'll twist along [36] till I get under that banyan down there.\
100 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Right. So I'll sit and wait for you up on that upper ridge then.\
101 H: A while back I-kha's father went down there, and a barking-deer jumped out and ran away!\
102  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Down there, eh?\
103 H: Yeah, over there--Hey, didn't you hear a shot [37] just now down at the foot of the mountain? \
104  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Well, since I'm high up here I can't hear too well, you know.\
105 H: Look over there below the mountain with the grove of 
\i m\uc0\u603 \u772 -p\u596 \u770  
\i0 -- I mean 
\i m\uc0\u603 \u768 -c\'fb-\'9a\u603 \u769 
\i0  trees! Shots are being fired on that barren mountain there.\
106  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : What are they shooting at then? \
107 H: They're hunting squirrels! A little bunch of miserable [38] young squirts [39] down there.\
108  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Who are they then, the ones down there? How many of them are there? [40]\
109 H: It's C\'e0-h\'e1 and his crowd and that oaf Th\'fb-y\'ec and his bunch. [41] They're mumbling away about something down there.\
110  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : What would you say they're cooking up, those guys? [42]  What are they looking for?\
111 H: The barking-deer jumped right towards them, but they didn't even see it! It ran away down [the slope]!\
112  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : They won't get anything to eat. [43]\
113 H: They probably won't now. That bunch of kids are awfully lazy.\
114  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : How many of them would you say have come? Are there any game-drivers [44] among those who've come down there?\
115 H: I saw some drivers just now driving [the game] down from an old field up over there.\
116 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Up over there, huh?\
117 H: Mm-hm.\
118  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Who are they, the game-drivers?\
119 H: It looks like the ones down there driving the game are north-country A-leh [45] folk. The A-leh are supposed to have black tips to their turds [46], you know.\
120 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Come on! You're really too much, you know\'85.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 <They fall into a story-telling mood>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Once upon a time there were some people--er--a father-in-law and a son-in-law. This man got himself a son-in-law, see. He was very happy about it. Well, so he cuts off this great big hunk of meat and boils it--but in this meat there was a little bit of gristle, see?\
121 H: Uh-huh.\
122 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Well, here they serve it up, see, after the wedding, they put it down and here they are eating and this son-in-law he's sitting right next to his father-in-law, see. So he takes and bites off this great big piece, the biggest piece of all--and it happens to have the gristle! \
123 H: The gristle, huh?\
124 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Right. He wants to throw it away, but he can't. He's ashamed before his father-in-law. So he takes and bites into it with all his might, a little too violently, and he bites so hard that his elbow pokes his father-in-law in the forehead, right between the eyes, and the father-in-law keels over! Nobody could do a thing. \
125 H: Gee, when you tell this it reminds [47] me of something that happened to me once a long time ago. \
126 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : What was it?\
127 H: Once when I went over to Meu-heh and Meu-khaw [48], they boiled up some chicken to feed me and they put in about three fingers' worth of wild ginger. When I took and chewed it, I passed the hell out[49]! \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 <laughter>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 128 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Then there's a story about another person who passed out. He was riding along on a bicycle. He was headed for a government office building [50] someplace [51]. Well, on the way to the government office, there were paddy-field dikes [52], see. It was an unusual way to go. Well, there was this buffalo-herder up behind [53] him on the road. From where he was behind him, he calls out to this old fellow [on the bicycle]: "Where are you going?" he says. Now [the guy] happened to be right near the water [in a paddy field], see. So, when he turns around to look back up the road, the bicycle goes right down into the water. [The buffalo-herder] had just said to him, "Where are you going?," right? So he answered, "To the off--" [54] \
129 H: "To the off--?"\
130  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Yeah, he didn't have time to say 'office,' so he could only say 'off--' before he sank into the water!\
131 H: I see.\
132  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Well, the bicycle was swallowed up down there. He couldn't get it back again. All he could get out was his hat, so he went back home and changed his clothes. Then he went off again.\
133 H: I had a time like that once too. [I was walking] someplace when I slipped and fell head over heels onto a ridge off the edge of the path [55]!\
134  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : (laughing) Wow, that was too much, something like that!\
135 H: When I looked around afterwards there I was smack under a clump of jujubes [56]! To think I'd landed down there! \
136  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : That was really too much!\
137 H: I was worried that somebody might see me screwing my way back up [57] [to the road], so I climbed up in a hurry, hauled myself up and set myself [on the road] again, then I headed the hell back for home and reached my house. That really happened to me. \
138  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Nothing like that's ever happened to me yet.\
139 H: Huh?\
140  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : I said, that has never happened to me yet.\
141 H: It really happened. I skidded and fell downhill, by God. The safety-fence [58] went smash too, I tell you. Against my shins as I crashed down through it! \
142  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : You must've been carefree in those days!\
143 H: Very carefree.\
144  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Well, how did 
\i you 
\i0 [59] court the girls in those days, then?\
145 H: I'd buy them [60] a pack of cigarettes someplace, and I'd buy some perfumed powder [61], and I'd buy a box of matches, then I'd go scratching my matches down in the middle of the village, making big red flames. Then the girls would come and say "Give me a smoke, give me a smoke [62]!"\
146  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Then how would you give them a smoke?\
147 H: I'd say to them "Come on over there, let's go over there." When we got there I'd give each one of them a cigarette. Then I'd say, "I've still got lots more of these, if you'd like to smoke again. Let's go over there..."\
148  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Aha. Well, then there's [a story about] another person. In this story it seems there was a certain woman. She got herself married [63] and her man was as happy as could be. (But) when the people were fed [at the wedding feast], he didn't eat, see. When night fell he said to his wife, "Give me something to eat." (But) there was no food left. Well, this fellow all of a sudden took up a--what do you call it--er, an earthen (rice-)pot, see, and stuck his hand in, and fished around in it for rice with his hand--with his fist. And it got stuck in there! Fishing around for rice it got stuck, and no matter what he did he couldn't get it out again. The fellow had a bald head, and the moonlight outside was shining, and the moonbeams struck his head, you see. As it was hitting his head, as the light was shining on it, [his wife] took [the pot] that was stuck [on his hand] and bashed him on the head with it. She thought it was a rock, you see. And boy, were they a couple that were sorry afterwards! [64]--Let's stop here, okay? [65] It's enough for now, isn't it? \
149 H: I don't think it's enough yet. I'm sure there's plenty more [we could say]. [66]\
150  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : I bet it's enough, as much as we've done.\
151 H: Hurry and keep going!\
152  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : My throat is killing me. I want to have a cigarette now. It's enough, okay?\
153 H: Do you know what is meant by "Red Lahu" and "Lahu M\uc0\u601 \u770 -n\u601 \u769 "?\
154  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : How do you mean?\
155 H: When we say 'Red Lahu' and 'Lahu M\uc0\u601 \u770 -n\u601 \u769 .'\
156  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Isn't it because the Red Lahu have red stripes on the skirts and jackets that they wear? So they're called 'Red Lahu.'\
157 H: Well, what about 'M\uc0\u601 \u770 -n\u601 \u769 ,' then? 'M\u601 \u770 -n\u601 \u769 .'\
158  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : This calling them 'M\u601 \u770 -n\u601 \u769 ' is supposed to be because they live up north-that's why they're called 'M\u601 \u770 -n\u601 \u769 '. \
159 H: I see. Then what about the ones called "A-leh"?\
160  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : [They're called] A-leh because they're supposed to be more ca-
\i leh
\i0 -ver than others! [67] \
161 H: Oh.\
162  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : So other people call them "A-leh." Because whatever they do they're ca-
\i leh
\i0 -verer at it than anybody else. \
163 H: They're supposed to be cleverer?\
164  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Yes.\
165 H: So that's why people give them that name, according to you! Their shit is black, too. Now I've also heard it said that the Red Lahu have red shit. I wonder if it 
\i is 
\i0 red, like they say! \
166  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : I daresay yours is black, too, your shit.\
167  H: I've never actually picked it out of my butt to look at it! [68]\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 <laughter>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 168  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : In that case, do take a good look at it!\
169 H: Well, I suppose it is black, at that. It's probably all quite black. \
170  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Mine is certainly black--Come on, now, that's enough already!\
171 H: What--do you want to have a smoke?\
172 C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  : Yeah, that's enough already!\
173 H: I've already smoked a big cigar. Aren't you smoking?\
(A voice) 174 There aren't even any cigars.\
175  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : Enough now, I tell you!\
176 H: You've had enough?\
177  C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660 : It's awfully long already.\
178 H: Oh, if you've had enough that's all right. \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Footnotes\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 [1] Lit: "Whatever we do, we do it!"\
[2] K\uc0\u603 \u768 -pa-t\'e2w\u660  is a Thai village below Huey Tat, in the valley of the same name.\
[3] f\'e2\uc0\u660  is really the generic term for all rodents: squirrels, porcupines, badgers, rats, etc. English 'rodent' has quite a different stylistic value, and is avoided in the translation.\
[4] c\uc0\u596  e ve lit., 'go around in circles,' 'wind one's way.'\
[5] m\uc0\u603 \u768 -\'9a\'e2 bamboo: a kind of large bamboo that indicates good rice and chili land. See DL:1018.\
[6] His hunting-dog. \
[7] Because he'll need both hands to carry the barking-deer.\
[8] \uc0\u596 \u768 -qh\u603 \u768 \u660  'layer; tier; notch'.\
[9] \'9a\ul i\ulnone  'know' + \uc0\u97 \u772  'perfective verb-particle, i.e. 'have something known; be sure of something.'\
[10] The epithet is conveyed by the exaggerated intonation on \'9a\uc0\u616  'die'.\
[11] The use of the benefactive verb-particle l\'e2 is ironic here--"I'll do you a favor and sit down!"\
[12] m\uc0\u616  'sit' is also used in the sense of 'rest.'\
[13] kh\uc0\u596 \u769 : a measure of weight equal to two t\'e2\u660 . See DL:380, 600.\
[14] Lit: "There's no place for saying", i.e., there's no gainsaying. \
[15] k\'e2-th\uc0\u596 \u770  (also pronounced kl\u603 -th\u596 \u770 \u660 ) < Thai kl\u603 \u768 t th\u596 \u596 \u331  'Gold Flake'; a brand of Thai cigarettes.\
[16] qh\uc0\u603 \u770  'excrement; any refuse, excretion, or dross.'\
[17] c\'e0-n\uc0\u596 \u770 -\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  'glutinous rice.' Used as provisions on outings away from home, because of its handy compactness.    \
[18] There is a joke here that the Lahu refused to explain to me because of its raunchy nature, and/or because it involved a particular person in the village. Na-\'9a\uc0\u616 \u769  is a girl's name. Lahu adults are often referred to by the names of their eldest child, a widespread practice in Southeast Asia known to anthropologists as 
\i teknonymy
\i0 . \
[19] kh\uc0\u596 
\f1 -n\'fa p\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1 -c
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f1 : kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f1 -n\'fa is < Thai kh\uc0\u601 n\u466 m 'cake'. p\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1 -c
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f1  is probably from p\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1  'copulate' and c
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f1  'stick together.' Cf. the Mexican slang word chingada, meaning 'a big lump of something' < chingar 'copulate'.\
[20] 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f1 -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f1  'headman's portion of killed game'. Since one of the hunters is the headman himself, they have the right to cook up that tender morsel immediately. See DL:207 and Plate 56.\
[21] ch\'e8
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1  c\'e2 'bite and eat.' The hunters' delight at this prospect is understandable in view of the fact that the ordinary Lahu in this village only gets to eat meat a few times a year. \
[22] a-k
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f1 : shards of pitch-pine, used for tinder.\
[23] b
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f1 -phu 'large fire; bonfire'. \'e0-m
\f2 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f1  b
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f1 -phu is how Paul Lewis translates 'fiery furnace' in his translation of the New Testament (1962).\
[24] c\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1 -l\'e1 v
\f2 \'e2
\f1  ve: 'cook by inserting the food into a bamboo-tube and holding it over a flame'--"tube-roast." Opposed to p\'ec ve 'roast by trying to a stick and holding over a flame'--"spit-roast." The lively pro-verb v\'e2, here meaning 'eat,' like the usual word c\'e2 'eat' itself, occurs as the second member of compounds relating to the preparation of food, but is best omitted in translation. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 [25
\f1 ] 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f1 -p\'ec: 'a spit-roast'--the meat together with the stick to which it is attached. \
[26] m
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f1 -p
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f1 : 'huge species of bamboo, edible when young'. See DL:1018.\
[27] Pa-h
\f2 \'f4\uc0\u660 
\f1 : a Thai village near Huey Tat. See DL:803.\
[28] j\'e2
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1  b
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f1  ve 'shoot stealthily', i.e. to hunt on noiseless feet.\
[29] Lit: "if it isn't birds, you don't catch anything to eat." A good translation might be 'your shooting is for the birds!'\
[30] n
\f2 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f1 -qh
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f1  p\'e9 
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f1  te ve 'to have an erection'. Used also to mean 'obvious, very much in evidence, as hard to ignore as an erected penis.'\
[31] Lit: "It's too much, your [speech]."\
[32] According to traditional Lahu belief, the gall-bladder is the seat of courage in men and animals. \
[33] Lit: "sneaking on tip-toes I'll fly through the air." m\'fb-phe 'the region above'\
[34] The meaning 'actually' is conveyed by the verb-particle \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f1  'still' i.e., "no matter what you say."\
[35] Lit. "It is not to such an extent, your [words]."\
[36] \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f1  ph
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f1  "twist forth" is slang for 'go.'\
[37] v\'e2 is here used as a pro-verb for b
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f1  'shoot,' as is clear from qh
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f1 , the classifier
\b  
\b0 for gunshots. The particle qha-p
\f2 \'e2\uc0\u660 
\f1  is used especially when auditory perception is at issue. See DL:272.\
[38] ch
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f1  l\'f9-k
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u770 
\f1  'wretches'; lit. "ruined and rotten people".  \
[39] y\'e2-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f1 -ku: an insulting term for an adolescent. \
[40] 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f1 -m
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f1  qh\'e0-n\'ee 
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \'e2 le: lit. "how many names are there?"\

\f2 [41
\f1 ] The pluralizer h
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f1  is usable after proper names, like Japanese -tachi.  q
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 -
\f1  is an uncomplimentary prefix to names. Th\'fb-y\'ec was actually one of the brightest young men in the village, and a good friend of the Headman! See DL:681.\
[42] te c\'e2 (vV + Vh), lit.,"do in order to eat", i.e. do for an envisaged advantage. te-c\'e2 can also be construed as a compound meaning 'to cook', so that the translation "What are they cooking up?" works well.\
[43] The standard Lahu phrase for "to be unsuccessful in hunting."\
[44] \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f1 -
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f1 -p
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f1 : members of the hunting party, armed with knives (and sometimes guns) and accompanied by dogs, who drive the game to where the "shooters" (\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f1 -b
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f1 -p
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f1 ) are lying in wait.\
[45] m\uc0\u601 \u769 -n\u601 \u769  A-l
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f1 : m\uc0\u601 \u769 -n\u601 \u769  'north-country' < Thai mya\u331  ny\'e1.  'A-leh' is the designation of a minor subgroup of Lahu in Yunnan, considered to be a kind of Lahu Shehleh, rather closely related to Black Lahu. See DL:81.\
[46] qh
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f1 -m
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f1  can mean either 'turd', or more specifically, 'the tip of a turd'. n
\f2 \'e2\uc0\u660 
\f1  means 'black', but can also be used for any dark color, e.g. dark brown. When the meaning 'black' is insisted upon the intensified form\
n
\f2 \'e2\uc0\u660 
\f1 -t
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f1 \uc0\u769  is used. See DL:752. \
[47] Lit: "when (you) say like this, I had (something) once a long time ago."\
[48] M
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f1 -kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f1  is a Northern Thai and Karen village a day's walk from Huey Tat. M
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f1 -h
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769  is a Northern Thai village near 
\f1 M
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f1 -kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 . See DL:1047.\
[49] ch\uc0\u596 -kh\u596 \u770  m\'e2 n\u596 \u770 : lit. "not be aware of human speech". According to context, this can mean either 'be unconscious', or 'be unreasonable'.
\f1 \
[50] \'9a\'e1-n\'e1-y
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f1 : \'9a\'e1n\'e1 < Bse. 'government
\b  
\b0 office'; y
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f1  < 'house.'\
[51] \'f4 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f1 -qhe "like over there."\
[52] ti-mi 
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f1 \uc0\u768 -t
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f1 : raised earth-boundaries around an irrigated paddy-field, serving to keep the water from running out. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 [53] y\'e0\uc0\u660 -q\u596  na p\'e1 "the upper part of the road"--i.e., the part the man on the bike had already traversed, i.e. the part behind him. Contra DL:1268, where the phrase is glossed 'the part of the road remaining to be traversed'.\
[54] The original is in Thai: "paj am--." He doesn't have time to finish his phrase 
\i paj amph\uc0\u601 \u601 
\i0  '(I'm) going to the government office."\
[55] This was a serious matter, since he could have fallen several hundred feet to his death.\
[56] The jujube-branches broke his fall. The onomatopoetic adverb ph\uc0\u601 \u770 n k\'e0\u660  can also be used for gusts of wind.\
[57] q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  p\'e0\u660  q\u596 \u768 \u660  la: this morpheme p\'e0\u660  is probably to be identified with the verb 'to copulate'--it is here being used as an obscene pro-verb in an elaborate expression. \
[58] k\uc0\u601 \u768 -t\'e0: (t\'e0 'stick'); sticks planted by the side of steep mountain paths. See DL:357.\
[59] The noun-particle m\uc0\u603  is a strong (often contrastive) topicalizer. \
[60] There is an anomalous use of l\'e2 here instead of p\'ee for 3rd person benefaction, undoubtedly to make it more vivid, as if he's interacting directly with the girls.\
[61] ph\'fb-d\uc0\u601  h\u596 \u769 : ph\'fb-d\u601  < Bse. < Eng 'powder.' h\u596 \u769  < Shan 'sweet-smelling'.\
[62] t\uc0\u596  ve: The causative of d\u596 \u768  ve 'to drink, to smoke.'\
[63] l\'e0\uc0\u660 -q\u596 \u772  t\'f4\u660  ve: 'get married', lit. "lay arms atop (each other)".\
[64] bo te ve means 'to repent' among its other shades of meaning. See DL:942.\
[65] C\'e0-\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2\u660  is tired of talking into the tape-recorder.\
[66] Note the allofamy between p\uc0\u603 \u770  'be enough' and p\u603  'be plenty'.\
[67] "Ca-leh-ver" is an attempt to convey the pun in the Lahu original between A-l\uc0\u603 \u769  and the adjective l\u603 \u770 \u660  'clever'.\
[68] Note the 4-verb concatenation: q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  'V back' 
\f3 + 
\f0 q\uc0\u603 \u769  'pick out of' + ni 'V and see' + m\u596 \u768  'witness the action'.\
\
}