{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 DoulosSIL;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww37900\viewh21400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 69 Picking Tea
\b0 \
[Tape VI, Side 2]\
1: C\'e0bo: Well, let\'92s talk a little bit about picking tea.  A-k\'ed, have you tried your hand at picking tea yet this year?\
2: A-k\'ed: Well, I\'92ve only managed to go picking one day so far.  Since I\'92m so busy hoeing my rice-field.  But my tea
\i is
\i0  \{doing fine/flourishing\}[1]!  I just haven\'92t managed to pick it yet.  I\'92ll just finish hoeing my field first.\
3: C\'e0bo: So how is it, Th\'fb-y\'ec? Have you done any tea-picking yet?\
4: Th\'fb-Y\'ec: Oh, I\'92ve picked two days already.\
5: C\'e0bo: Is it good and thick?[2]\
6: TY: Well, a little bit of it is doing nicely.  Some of it has gotten rough[3] though.\
7: C\'e0bo: Oh, then have you already tried carrying it down to sell at the tea-market[4] \'93place where you sell tea\'94?  Way over there [at the tea-factory].\
8: Th\'fay\'ec: I\'92ve already tried going there.\
9: C\'e0bo: This year how much do they say you get for one kilo?\
10: Th\'fay\'ec: They say about a baht and a half.\
11: CB: A baht and a half.  Wow, last year we only got 20 satang.[5]  This year we get a baht and a half!\
12: TY Those were the leaves, now it\'92s [we\'92re talking about] the shoots.[6]\
13: CB: This year you\'92re going to pick the shoots too, are you!  You know [\'f4o], when you do something like plucking the shoots the plant nearly dies!\
14: TY: They told us to do that.  [\'93What they said was, do it this way\'94]  Pick the shoots this year, then next year, you get to pick the leaves again.[7]\
15: CB: Next year you pick the leaves again, they say.\
16: TY: Yeah.\
17: CB: Well, well!  That\'92s all right, all right then, in that case!  P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 , this year how many kilo did you get when you picked tea?[8]\
18: Pa-eh: Only five kilo.\
19: CB: Only five kilo.  What happened, the tea wasn\'92t growing thick, in your orchard?\
20:[Whisper]: Because he\'92s lazy!\
21: CB: Because he\'92s lazy.  Alas, that\'92s how it goes with lazy people.  They can\'92t earn a proper living/food to eat.\
22: Pa-eh: Because Th\'fby\'ec keeps telling me to go visit Thai girls\'97because that\'92s all
\i he
\i0  does/he just keeps visiting Thai girls.\
23: TY: [We]
\i have
\i0  to go visit Thai girls.  After you work a little\'97You just want to see a woman\'97we don\'92t have wives yet![9]\
24: Somebody: When you say \'93don\'92t go,\'94 they don\'92t listen, those guys.\
25: CB: How many of them are there, those Thai girls?\
26: TY: There\'92s only one, and I\'92ve never even gotten to see her kisser! She just stayed down [in her home] all the time.[10]\
27: CB: She probably didn\'92t want either one of you.\
28: Somebody: They\'92re supposed to be very pretty, the two of them, the prettiest, they say.\
29: Pa-eh: It\'92s those guys C\'e0-c
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0 , C\'e0-
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 , and C\'e0-q
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 .  They went to them [the Thai girls] without being invited.\
30: TY: If it wasn\'92t for them, it would have been great for us!\
31: CB: Those guys are blushing like girls [
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -ma-pa qhe ni y\'f2]!\
32: Somebody: Even though they [the girls] said \'93Go home!\'94 they [the suitors] didn\'92t listen.  When they said \'93you ought to be ashamed! [this is really shameful]\'94 they didn\'92t listen, so\'85\
33: Pa-eh: [imitating girl\'92s voice] \'93I didn\'92t invite you!  And yet you came.\'94\
34: CB: Oh, here we are, picking tea. and you act this way.  You\'92ll never earn a living that way!\
35: C\'e0-c
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0 : It\'92s like these guys are just squirting water at each other!\
36: CB: Maybe it\'92s because the weather\'92s hot they just keep fooling around, playing around.\
37: Pa-eh: The fact is, young men are happy, and\'97\
38: Somebody: It\'92s actually very good, what the two of them have been saying.  If one of them doesn\'92t get the Thai girl, the other one will, they\'92re saying.\
39: TY: If they [the other group of suitors] hadn\'92t come, I bet everything would have been fine for the two of us.[11]\
40: Pa-eh: It would have been fine.\
41: Jesus Christ [p\'f2th\'f4o, For crying out loud], when you tend your fields and pick your tea this way, there\'92s no way you\'92re going to come up in the world.[12]  When people teach you, you ignore what they say, for two years now!  You\'92ve been acting this way, both of you\'85And have you finished hoeing your swiddens [upland fields]?\
42: Pa-eh: I haven\'92t finished, haven\'92t finished\'97my field either.\
43: TY: Well, as for having my fields, as far I\'92ve only finished one
\i t\'fb
\i0 [13] and 20 
\i rai
\i0 .\
44: CB: Only one
\i t\'fb
\i0  and 20 
\i rai
\i0 .\
45: TY: Yeah.\
46: So you got [about] two
\i t\'fb 
\i0 from your field!  Hey, C\'e0-m\'e1,[14] when will your father and you do the picking, of your tea?\
45: C\'e0-m\'e1: Well, mine, I guess I can\'92t manage to pick yet.  I have to finish holing my swidden first.\
46: CB: After you finish hoeing you\'92ll have at the picking.\
47: C\'e0-m\'e1: This field [I mine] I\'92ve been thinking I\'92ll probably have to hoe for two weeks.  Two weeks and five days.\
48: CB: Two weeks and five days.\
49: C\'e0-m\'e1: Yeah, two weeks and five days.  After I\'92ve finished hoeing I\'92ll go picking, until I\'92ve finished the job.[15]  I haven\'92t dug [the necessary holes] for planting my tea-orchard garden yet.[16]\
50: Somebody: It\'92ll all be dried up by that time!\
51: CB: That\'92s what I thought too!  Mine also I haven\'92t gotten to try picking yet, that tea.  But still, more that not being able to pick the tea, in my opinion this is what I think: more than having tea or not having tea, I think not having rice is a cause for anxiety, so [only] after finishing hoeing the [rice] field do I intend to pick [the tea].\
52: C\'e0-m\'e1: Mine [my rice field] I still have to hoe for a month and a half \'93fifteen days\'94.  Once I\'92ve finished hoeing I also plan to pick.\
53: Somebody: By that time yours will be all rough.\
54: Somebody else: And tell him that he still hasn\'92t even cleared the land for his tea garden.\
55: CB: Speaking of his tea-garden, it\'92s kept in a densely overgrown state [he leaves it all overgrown with weeds]\
56: Somebody: It\'92s because you\'92re lazy, all you guys.\
57: Somebody else: If
\i he
\i0 [17] sees it, it will never do, it will never do.\
58: CB: Maybe even [m\'e2 \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  \'93I don\'92t even know\'94] when he sees it, he\'92ll take it back from you.  There\'92s also another guy,18 C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 ,
\i  
\i0 like that, not taking care of his tea-garden!\
59: TY [playing role of C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 ]: Well, I\'92ve had a good talk with the Boss, about this.\
60: CB: What did he say to you then?\
61: C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : What he said was, when you have free time for [this] work, just carefully slash away the undergrowth[18] and then do the picking.  If you don\'92t do this [slash the undergrowth], the tea won\'92t be any good, he said.\
62: CB: Did he tell you that the shoots would get all shriveled up?\
63: C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : Yep, he did.\
64: CB: Hmm.\
65: TY: When I finish the work\'85\
66: CBL Hey, C\'e0-l
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 , Headman,[19] what about you\'97haven\'92t you picked your tea already this year yourself?\
67: Headman: Oh, I\'92m a great tea-picker, you know![20]\
68: CB: As for your picking, you keep saying \'93I\'92ll pick, I\'92ll pick!\'94, but I don\'92t see that any tea has come [from you]!\
69: Headman: I\'92m not free yet\'85\
70: CB: You\'92re only saying that with your mouth! Whatever your do [it\'92s like that]\'85Anyhow, maybe it\'92s because you\'92re lazy, isn\'92t it!\
71: C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : Yes, A while ago for once he did pick.\
72: Headman: \'85Wherever I have picked it\'92s nice and cleared off![21]\
73: C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : Oh, as for the headman, he hasn\'92t done it [any tea-picking]!  Last year he once picked with me, and he did pick very well.  [But] this year, one has to say that he hasn\'92t been so diligent, the headman.\
74: Headman: It\'92s just as I said[22].  In the places where I\'92ve picked, the bottoms of the tea-plants are beautiful [l\'e0
\f3 \uc0\u42890 
\f0 kh
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f0  p
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f0 ].\
75: C\'e0-q
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : He does it well!  That guy, if he\'92s free of [other] work and manages to do it.  But I haven\'92t seen him do it yet, as of now.\
76: Somebody: So he\'92s good at it\'97but he doesn\'92t manage to pick much of it!  If it\'92s just that he\'92s not good at it\'85[23]\
77: Somebody: As for getting it, he\'92s not capable of getting very much, not like us, when it comes to tea-picking, that guy.[24]\
78: Somebody: Because he\'92s so good at it!\
79: CB: Other people\'97I\'92ve heard that others have gotten five or six kilos, while he just got a kilo and a half, for heaven\'92s sake!\
80: Since he\'92s all duded up, he can\'92t pick tea properly!\
81: Somebody else: In order to be able to live on it for a long time you\'92ve got to take care of [one\'92s crop] very well!  Your (pl.) sprouts are starting to bend and get knocked over[25] when they\'92re only one span high.  This whole year they won\'92t sprout again!  They\'92ll all dry up!\
82: It\'92s just that they\'92re trying to get a lot, by doing it that way.\
83: CB: Wow, Y\'e2-p
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0\i  
\i0 breaks off each individual sapling into two sections and puts them in [the ground].  You\'92re lucky the Boss didn\'92t see you![26]\
84: TY: Well, that\'92s just the way we have to do it!\
85: P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : The reason is, we do it to get a better crop.[27]  As for mine, the tea plants haven\'92t died at all!  The ones that I picked\'97\
86: Somebody: There are lots of people\'97\
87: P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : We make [break] each sapling into two sections.\
88: Somebody: Don\'92t tell me they didn\'92t die!  They did!\'97\
89: TY: Anyway, we really ought to pick it fast!  Otherwise the Boss might take [the tree-plantations] back some day.\
90: CB: Both of you [P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0  & Th\'fb-y\'ec] are young men, so you should concentrate your minds28, and if you do the work [necessary] to earn a living, if you can settle down and do that, you\'92ll get plenty to eat, you two.\
91:. TY: Well, you\'97\
91:. P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : The likes of the two of them are really good at it.\
92: CB: They tell me [you\'92ve been running around after] Thai girls, eh? ground squirrels, eh? and striped squirrels, eh? Taking your gun and hiding wherever you find a shady place\'97you\'92ll never make a living that way![28]  When people teach you, listen to what they say, these people!  [You\'92re] so\{stubborn/thick-skulled\}[29], [you\'92re] hard to get through to\'97I\'92ve never seen the like.[30]\
93: TY: Well, what do you teach I listen to, I want to listen to.  Please try teaching me properly!\
94: CB: I just teach the best [\'93This is all I can teach\'94] I can, to the people.  And you add the word \'93properly!\'94\
95: TY: Other people [i.e.,
\i we
\i0  (Y and P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 )], who \{aren\'92t married/don\'92t have a wife\}, can\'92t [act] the way you do.\
96: CB: Well, how much have you usually gotten each year then, when you\'92ve finished picking?  From your garden, Y\'e2-p
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 ?\
97: Y\'e2-p
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : Well, I\'97\
98: CB: I [qhe] mean, what you pick in the course of one year.\
99: P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : I myself, what I pick in one year\'97\
100: TY: Is it more than a hundred?[31]\
101: P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 : It wasn\'92t just [\'93didn\'92t stay at\'94] \'93more than a hundred\'94!  It was about 300![32]\
102: CB: Is it 300 then?!  So, it\'92s about 300[33], you say, in one year, from his.  Well then, A-k\'ed, about how many hundred have you usually gotten in one year, from yours?\
103: A-k\'ed: Well as for me, I\'92m not able to pick everything [I\'92ve got]!  Since \{I\'92m all alone/I have to do it all by myself\}, every year my tea goes rough [34].  I don\'92t have a lot of people.  But anyway, it one year I just get about 150 kilo!  As for tea, it\'92s there.  I [just] can\'92t pick it [all].\
104: CB: Hmm-\
105: A-k\'ed: I have a lot of work, it\'92s not just this [tea-picking] that I have to do.\
106: CB: Yes indeed.  That\'92s the way it goes.  We hillfolk cultivate mountain fields[35] for a living, since we don\'92t have [irrigated] paddy-fields or h\'f3-n\'e2[36].\
107: A-k\'ed: As for that, if we keep fussing with our tea, we won\'92t have enough to eat!  When we\'92re free [of other work], once in a while we just try to earn some pocket-money [\'93seek to use money\'94][37].\
108: CB: Yes. Well then, Headman, didn\'92t you say that you were going to go ask for labor[38] to [help you] cultivate?  This year?\
109: Headman: Well, I am trying to ask [\'93go and ask\'94] for help.  From among you guys, my relatives\'97\
110: CB: If you are going to ask for help, that\'92s very fine!  No matter how many people come from each household [respond to your request]\'97whether it\'92s two people or three people.\
111: TY: Nobody will come!  Don\'92t go asking them, don\'92t go asking them!\
112: Headman: Since I won\'92t be giving them any wages, whether I ask for help or not \{is my business/depends on me\}.  If I ask them and they don\'92t come, other [\'9au][39] people will be told, and when these others [they] hear that they didn\'92t come, it will be their fault [\'9au \'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  c
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  ve y\'f2][40]\
113: CB: Yes.  Do try asking! Even if one person doesn\'92t come, another person will\'97that\'92s the way people are.[41]  What day are you planning to go ask for help?\
114: Headman: I\'92m planning to go and try asking on Wednesday.[42]\
115: CB: On Wednesday.  Please don\'92t do it on Wednesday.  It\'92s [too] hard to carry the hoes back.[43]  If you do it after the weekend, do it on Monday.  As long as people have carried the hoes back on Saturday.\
116: Headman: Well, then, I\'92ll do it on Tuesday!\
117: CB: Mm-hm.  If you do it on Tuesday, that\'92ll be fine.\
118: Headman: [giving the reason he wants to do it Tues. instead of Mon.] For one day I just [have/ want to] do to my [field/ swidden] and pick up [my tools] and carry them back.  After doing a few licks of work in the swidden too.\
119: CB: I\'92ve heard that you [guys] now get one and a half baht [per kilo] per person for picking tea.[44]  As for me, I would only get 25 satang, [that\'92s what] they [gave] me.  Even for one kilo.\
120: Headman: Wow.\
121: TY: It\'92s because you\'92re [i.e., C\'e0-bo] no good at picking!  Because you\'92re not like other people.\
122: CB: That\'92s not so!  If you look at what I pick, it\'92s the same [as others].\
123: Headman: I don\'92t think it\'92s like that [i.e., that they discriminate in pay according to who the picker is].  That it\'92s \'93each person a different kind\'94[45].\
124:CB: Maybe they
\i do
\i0  discriminate.[46]  They may like/favor one person and hate another one.\
125: P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -\'e9: If you don\'92t agree on the terms carefully [\'93don\'92t talk with each other\'94], that\'92s what happens.\
126: Headman: Well, I\'92m going to discuss this carefully again.\
127: CB: You relatives, if you\'92re friendly with him [the Boss][47], you just ought to help me speak.\
128: TY: It\'92s probably because you\'92re not acquainted with each other.[48]\
129: CB: No, we\'92re not acquainted [\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  d\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 ], me anyway.\
130: TY: Well, we all are acquainted with him.\
131: CB: Hmm\'97\
\



Footnotes:\

[1] c\'e0 ve \'91to flourish, be doing well, be luxuriant (of growing things).\'92\
[2] c\'e0 d\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  \'e0 l\'e2.  c\'e0 \'91grow thickly\'92.\
[3] \'9a\'e2
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  ve \'91be rough, hard; to lose tenderness\'92.\
[4] A four-verb concatenation: ca p\'fb h
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  ni [go and carry sell tea].  Actually a tea-factory (owned by the \'9aath\'ea-l\'f3)\
[5] one baht=100 satang\
[6] Ordinary tea-leaves went for 20 stg/kilo, while the tender shoots go for 11/2 baht/kilo\
[7] The same principle as pruning a tree\
[8] Pa-eh: P
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 h (short for Y\'e2-p
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0  \'93Sonny, Little Boy\'94) was my chief consultant during my 1977 fieldtrip\
[9] Fragmentary sentence: k\'e1 a-c\'ed te qo, y\'e2-m\'ee k\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  a-c\'ed-n
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -\'e1 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0  [
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -m\'ee-ma] m\'e2 c
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u101 \u772 
\f0  ve 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 .\
[10] By this slang word I translate Thuyi\'92s jocular coinage ph\'fb
\f3 -
\f1 m
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f1 \uc0\u770 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0\i ,
\i0  reordering syllables of the ordinary word m
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f1 \uc0\u770 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -ph\'fb\
[11] qha-d
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  is an adverbial expression, here used as a full verb.\
[12] Lit., \'93it will not fit that you will become like other people.\'94\
[13] This word is not well explained in DL. (t\'ea t\'fb m\'ec 
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 ) From the context here it looks as if one 
\i t\'fb
\i0  contains somewhat more than 20 
\i rai
\i0 \
[14] m\'e1 \'91be lucky in hunting\'92\
[15] m\'e2 p\uc0\u601 \u768  c
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0  = p\uc0\u601 \u768  e ve th\'e2 qha-q\'e0\
[16] \'9au
\i  
\i0 : i.e. the Boss (\'9aa-th\'ea-l\'f3) from whom Huey Tad rents the tea-orchards\
[17] Here the classifier m\'e0, usually referring to objects, is applied to a person, creating a colloquial and somewhat pejorative sense.]\
[18] ph
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  \'91slash\'92 away undergrowth\'97an important part of the Agricultural Cycle\
[19] C\'e0bo here, showing this is a play, calls the headman C\'e0-l
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  (the name of my citibred consultant who accompanied me on my trips to H.T.) instead of his real name C\'e0b\'ed\
[20] This sentence is glossed \'93Well, I guess I\'92ll really pick tea for a living\'94 in DL, under l\'f3-l\'e2
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 \
[21] y\'e0 qhe ph
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  k
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  q\'f4
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  ve \ul p
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -y\'ec\ulnone  d\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  ve 
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0   This word glossed in my fieldnotes with Chinese [Characters], but in DL 861 it\'92s \'93a cleared-off area (as from cattle grazing a place clean)\'94.\
[22] \'f4 qhe qha-\'9aw\'ed y\'f2.\
[23] i.e., we could do with less expertise and more actual work\
[24] The translation attempts to capture the multiple syntactic inversions in the Lahu: 
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a t\'ed qo c
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u770 
\f0 -c
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  m\'e2 
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a p
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f0  ve, h
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -\'e1 qhe c
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -c
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 , l\'e0 ph
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  ve t\'ed qo, y
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 .\
[25] t\'e0 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0 n ch
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0  n
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  ch
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0  ve\
[26] Lit. \'93It\'92s because the Boss wasn\'92t looking.\'94\
[27] 
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a c\'e2 m\'e2 \'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 /t\'f9 te ve \'93do it to get a lot to eat\'94\
[28] [ni-ma t\'ea \'9a\uc0\u299  
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  t\'ed t\uc0\u257 , literally "placing only a single heart"]\
[28] slightly revised from actual sentence in my fieldnotes in DL. p. 475\
[29] ch
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0  (m)\'e2 m
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  j
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0 . A formulaic expression expressing rather jocular disapproval\
[30] n\'e0-q
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -p
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f0  ph\'ec 
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  te ve.  Differently glossed in DL 742, 890\
[31] Th\'fb-y\'ec jocularly uses N. Thai 
\i lo
\f2\i0 \uc0\u603 \u769 \u660 
\f0\i  p\'e0j
\i0  [Si. r
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 \u596 
\f0 j paj] for \'91more than 100\'92. Maybe not jocularly, since the Lahu had to use Thai when bargaining with the Boss and his staff at the tea-factory.\
[32] This number is also given in Lahuized N. Thai 
\i s\'e0
\i0  
\i lo
\f2\i0 \uc0\u603 \u769 \u660 
\f0\i  
\i0 [Si: s
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u780 
\f0 am r
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 \u596 
\f0 j].\
[33] This time C\'e0-Bo gives the numeral in Lahu: 
\i \'9a
\f2\i0 \uc0\u603 \u770 \u660 
\f0\i  ha
\i0 \
[34] If tea is left too long growing, it becomes hard and unusable\
[35] swiddens, unirrigated, requiring backbreaking labor to cultivate.  See the Agricultural Cycle in DL ______.\
[36] CB uses both the Lahu (ti-mi) and Shan (h\'f3-n\'e2; cf. Si. r\'e2j-naa) for \'93paddy-field.\'94\
[37] I.e., whatever money they earn from tea is just for little luxuries, not vital to survival like the rice crop\
[38] 
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2 ca l
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  q
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  ve.  Custom of helping out a fellow villager in times of intense work in the fields, the understanding that this kindness will eventually be reimported when the shoe is on the other foot\
[39] The referents of the two occurences of \'9au \'91remote 3rd person\'92 in the sentence is not clear: l
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  l
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0  m\'e2 l\'e0 qo, \'9au \'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  tho p\'ee \'f2 ve l
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 , k\'e2 \'f2 qo m\'e2 l\'e0 ve qo, \'9au \'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  c
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  ve y\'f2.\
[40] I.e., it will not be to their credit, but it\'92s up to them\
[41] Translating the afterthought topic \'93ch
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0  l
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 \'94\
[42] The headman naturally uses the X\'92n way of naming days of the week.\
[43] The idea seems to be that as the work-week goes on, it becomes more and more difficult to drag one\'92s tools to the fields.\
[44] C\'e0-bo is apparently speaking of how much a Lahu might earn picking tea for the Thai.\
[45] t\'ea 
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2 t\'ea y
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 n \'93one person one kind\'94 y
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 n
\i  <
\i0  Shan (Su, j\'e0an), i.e., each person differently.\
[46] t\'ea 
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2 t\'ea y
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 n te ve may be paraphrased as: te ve k\'e1 qha-\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0  k\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  p\'ee ve 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -ph\'fb m\'e2 \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0  \'93Although the work done is the same, the wages given are not the same.\'94\}\
[47] Lit \'93if you know his words and his breath\'94\
[48] TY uses the Thai expression h\'fb-c\'e2
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -k
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  (Si. r\'fauc\'e0k kan) \'91be acquainted with each other\'92, instead of Lahu \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  d\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  ve.  Probably because a Thai person is involved.}
