{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 70 Wooing the Maidens\

\b0 [Tape #6, Side 2 (continued in #77)]\
1 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Th\'fb-y\'ec, where are you going tonight?\
2 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, I guess I'll go try \{courting the girls / wooing me a maiden\} tonight.\
3 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Whereabouts?\
4 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Oh, over there where all the girls are. i've been planning to have a go at it.\
5 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : When you go, call me, too, please. I'll just have something to eat first.\
6 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, the two of us are good friends, so let's \{get together / join up\} and go. \
7 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : People like us ought to join up and do it together.\
8 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Won't you \{invite / call\} me, too, then?\
9 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Oh, you can go, too, \{pal
\fs18 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  / my friend\}! Now there are three!\
10 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Yep.\
11 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : The oldest one is mine!\
12 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Oh, the best-looking one is mine!\
13 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : It's impossible then.\
14 Th\'fb-y\'ec: That's not right, old buddy. I'm the one who visited that \{girl / one\} of yours first, you know!\
15 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : You say you visited her first, but I never saw you do it!
\fs18 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub \
16 Th\'fb-y\'ec: I've made a \{proper / regular\} \{engagement / betrothal\} with that one!\
17 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Come on, now, as far as betrothals go,
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  you're not committed as much as I am.
\fs18 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub \
18 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, in that case, I'll switch to that younger sister of hers.
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub  If you take 
\i her
\i0  on.\
19 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Go ahead, go ahead!\
20 Th\'fb-y\'ec: You take on the older one--I'll take on the younger one.\
21 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Fine, fine.
\fs18 \super 6
\fs24 \nosupersub  That's how I had it planned anyway.\
22 Th\'fb-y\'ec: What about you, my friend?\
23 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Me, you mean?\
24 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Yeah.\
25 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : I haven't even managed to have a proper talk [with anybody] yet!
\fs18 \super 7
\fs24 \nosupersub \
26 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Have a try at talking then. \
27 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, let's get going in a few minutes\'85. Oh, our friend is going to eat first now. Let's wait for him.\
28  C\'e0bo (to Th\'fb-y\'ec): Apparently this fellow's girl hasn't been much in the mood for courting with him, my friend.
\fs18 \super 8
\fs24 \nosupersub \
29 Th\'fb-y\'ec: I don't know. He told me that when he went to have a private talk with her,
\fs18 \super 9
\fs24 \nosupersub  she wouldn't even chat with him the way she should. [To C\'e0l\uc0\u596 \u770 ] It's probably because you didn't do a very good job of making conversation with 
\i her
\i0 ! \
30 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : The thing is I said too much to her. She didn't talk to
\i  me
\i0 ! She must've been embarrassed, I guess.\
31 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Because you just haven't gotten to know each other yet.
\fs18 \super 10
\fs24 \nosupersub \
32 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Probably so--that's probably it.\
33 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : After two or three nights, \{she'll / you'll\} probably get \{more familiar / friendlier\}.\
34 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, with me now, as far as conversation goes, when I go over there she talks to me even if I sit on the ground [outside] without even going into her house!\
35 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Won't you please explain to me how you do it? Since I've never heard [anything about how it's done]!\
36 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Oh, boy!
\fs18 \super 11
\fs24 \nosupersub \
37 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : When you go, what's the first thing you say to the girl?\
38 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : You take a stick and poke it through from underneath the floor.
\fs18 \super 12
\fs24 \nosupersub  When she comes out you say "Have a chat with me!"\
39 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : You say "Have a chat with me," eh?\
40 \{P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769  / Th\'fb-y\'ec\} : Right, right.\
41 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Then what does she say
\fs18 \super 13
\fs24 \nosupersub  to you?\
42 Th\'fb-y\'ec: She says, "You say something first! What have you been thinking about?" But we 
\i have
\i0  to tell her about our feelings.
\fs18 \super 14
\fs24 \nosupersub \
43 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : What sort of thing?\
44 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Whether we love her or not. She listens to what we say to her. \
45 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : We've got to tell her "I love you!"\
46 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : You've got to say "I love you," huh?\
47 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Yes.\
48 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Can't you say "I don't love you"?\
49 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : If we say "I don't love you," then they won't love us either.\
50 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Hmm.\
51 Th\'fb-y\'ec: But once we get her into the woods, we've got to ask, "What's your real reason for coming out here [with me] tonight?
\fs18 \super 15
\fs24 \nosupersub  Did you come because you like me?" Then she says, "Well, I came here because I've been thinking about you. I wanted to have a good talk with you." \
52 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Then how do you \{go on / continue\} with it after that? Do you talk about all sorts of things?\
53 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, after you've had your talk, you write letters to each other all day, and at night you go visit her. \
54 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Which one is it that you say you'll marry? The one \{you visit all the time / you're visiting\}? \
55 Th\'fb-y\'ec: That guy
\fs18 \super 16
\fs24 \nosupersub  has taken her away from me now!\
56 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Gee, there's no sense competing with each other like that, is there
\fs18 \super 17
\fs24 \nosupersub ? \
57 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Oh, that guy
\fs18 \super 16
\fs24 \nosupersub  really \{gives people
\fs18 \super 17
\fs24 \nosupersub  a hard time / causes people a lot of trouble\}!\
58 C\'e0bo: And the fellow is also very jealous, you know. \
59 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : I am not jealous. She likes me as I like her!\
60 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Wow, is this girl so beautiful then? Why is it that so many people are fighting over her?\
61 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, her body is beautiful. But her heart is fickle.
\fs18 \super 18
\fs24 \nosupersub  There's nothing that can be done with her right now. \
62 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Her body's beautiful, all right. But her heart is fickle.\
63 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : How old did you say she is?\
64 Th\'fb-y\'ec: If you figure her age, I'd say she's around diez y seis or diez y siete.
\fs18 \super 19
\fs24 \nosupersub \
65 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : She's probably about seventeen.\
66 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Can she read and write?
\fs18 \super 20
\fs24 \nosupersub \
67 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Oh, she can read and write, too.\
68 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : How many grades did she finish
\fs18 \super 21
\fs24 \nosupersub , in her studies?\
69 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : The Lahu don't have school-grades like that! All we know is our ABC's
\fs18 \super 22
\fs24 \nosupersub !\
70 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, when she writes letters to me, they're very nice, too! The handwriting, I mean.\
71 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : What sort of thing does she write you? Won't you just read me a little so I'll know
\fs18 \super 23
\fs24 \nosupersub ?\
72 Th\'fb-y\'ec: She writes me things like "Now, amidst my constant thoughts of you, I send you these few words
\fs18 \super 24
\fs24 \nosupersub --This is what I want to say:" she says. "Night and day I think only of you."
\fs18 \super 25
\fs24 \nosupersub \
73 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Is that all? It couldn't be. It must be longer [than that].\
74 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, there's still another part.\
75 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Tell me all of it! I want to hear.\
76 Th\'fb-y\'ec: She says, "
\i You
\i0  probably don't think of 
\i me
\i0  day and night. But I can't even eat from thinking about you!" For my part I \{say / write\} to her: " Oh, I think of you also day and night, whether I sleep or whether I sit.
\fs18 \super 26
\fs24 \nosupersub  But please, let us firmly resolve our hearts
\fs18 \super 27
\fs24 \nosupersub  and \{do / make it\} so that we may live together." \
77 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : She'll say [things like] "Even if I eat pure white rice, it is as chaff in my mouth!"
\fs18 \super 28
\fs24 \nosupersub  "Even if I drink pure water, it is as though I drank a foul draught."
\fs18 \super 28
\fs24 \nosupersub \
78 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : I see.\
79 Th\'fb-y\'ec: But some people just say those things with their mouths. In their hearts they're not in love.\
80 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Some people love with their body and soul, completely. Others may say it with their mouths, but it isn't so.\
81 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, let's go then! If you're through eating we'll go a-courting!\
82 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Let's go.\
83 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : What time is it now?
\fs18 \super 29
\fs24 \nosupersub \
84 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Oh, it's probably about
\i  a las seis
\i0\fs18 \super 30
\fs24 \nosupersub  now.\
85 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : The moon hasn't come out yet, has it?\
86 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : I certainly wouldn't think so, since we're only 
\i a las seis
\i0 . At seven, at seven o' clock. \
87 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, I don't have a watch,
\fs18 \super 31
\fs24 \nosupersub  so I don't know anymore. Because my watch is on the blink,
\fs18 \super 32
\fs24 \nosupersub  damn it.\
88 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Mine is busted, too. But i'm used to it, so I can still tell the time from it.
\fs18 \super 33
\fs24 \nosupersub \
89 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Do the girls have watches on them [too].\
90 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Does my girl have a watch? Well, she told me she didn't. When [I found out] she wanted one I told her I wouldn't be able to buy her one until I could go to Chiengmai.
\fs18 \super 34
\fs24 \nosupersub \
91 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Is that what you said?\
92 Th\'fb-y\'ec: I've been planning to buy her one the next time I go to Chiengmai.
\fs18 \super 35
\fs24 \nosupersub  I \{wonder / don't know\} how much I'll have to pay--for a little tiny watch like this.\
93 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : I'll bet you can get one for two or three hundred [baht].\
94 Th\'fb-y\'ec: I can. For two or three hundred.\
95 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : If the machinery [inside] isn't very good. If the works are fairly good\'85.
\fs18 \super 36
\fs24 \nosupersub \
96 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : A woman's watch, eh?--Say, why don't you go court a Thai girl? Haven't you ever done it?\
97 Th\'fb-y\'ec: A Thai? Oh, once I did court a Thai, a while ago.\
98 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Aha! Tell me about it, won't you? Tell me all about how it went.
\fs18 \super 37
\fs24 \nosupersub \
99 Th\'fb-y\'ec: About that? Well, the Thai now,
\fs18 \super 38
\fs24 \nosupersub  they have a custom that you can only court inside the house. That doesn't suit me at all.
\fs18 \super 39
\fs24 \nosupersub  They can't get together and go out into the woods like us Lahu. \
100 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Those Thais, they'll love whoever goes to them--really!\
101 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Sometimes
\fs18 \super 40
\fs24 \nosupersub  even, while we're visiting them all nice and proper, some other guy comes too, and she talks to 
\i him
\i0  at the same time--that really gets us mad!\
102 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Then we feel like clenching our firsts and having a fight!\
103 Th\'fb-y\'ec: That's right. [That's why] the Thais are [always] fighting with each other.\
104 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : You say They're fickle, the Thai girls?\
105 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Very fickle, the Thai race.\
106 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : You say you can't lead them out into the woods?\
107 Th\'fb-y\'ec: You can't go [there].\
108 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : What would happen if you 
\i did
\i0  take her into the \{woods / jungle\}?\
109 Th\'fb-y\'ec: They say that that isn't their custom! They say [you've got to] stay (visiting) in the house, and have your conversation [there]. But we Lahu have no experience doing it in the house, so we don't dare to! \
110 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Well,
\i  I
\i0  dare to.\
111 Th\'fb-y\'ec: I'm embarrassed in front of the parents. \
112 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : The parents ought to help us too, for their part.\
113 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Really?\
114 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : The parents ought to help us too, for their part. Once we've gone [to visit].\
115 Th\'fb-y\'ec: But they use up a lot of cigarettes
\fs18 \super 41
\fs24 \nosupersub ! \
115 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : <laughs>\
116 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Oh, you don't have to tell me about that cigarette business!
\fs18 \super 42
\fs24 \nosupersub \
117 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Whenever we \{get / earn\} a little [spending money] from picking tea, we just have to spend it all on that!\
118 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : <laughing> Each time you go courting a girl how many packs do you use up--of [those] big gold flakes
\fs18 \super 43
\fs24 \nosupersub ?\
119 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, I use up a pack of the big gold flakes every night.\
120 C\'e0-l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Do the girls smoke, too?\
121 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Some of them smoke and some don't.\
122 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Even if they don't smoke, if we offer
\fs18 \super 44
\fs24 \nosupersub  one they'll smoke it.
\fs18 \super 45
\fs24 \nosupersub \
123 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Even if she doesn't smoke, there's nothing she can do [to avoid it]. If 
\i we
\i0  smoke, then she has to smoke, too. We've got to harmonize with each other, \{completely / identically\}. \
124 C\'e0bo: Do you tell her "If you don't smoke you don't love me"?\
125 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Right you are.\
126 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : The time those three of us went to Ta-ton
\fs18 \super 46
\fs24 \nosupersub  it was just like that. Even though the girl
\fs18 \super 47
\fs24 \nosupersub  had never smoked, we insisted that she smoke the tobacco we offered her, and she got dizzy as hell from it. And we had to put out for a whole package of candy [to console her]--candy!\
[Continued, Selection #77]\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. phi \'f2: a friendly address term used to a young man. \
2. Lit: "although you visited her first, you've never been seen to visit her!"\
3. Lit: "if you go reckoning betrothals"\
4. Lit: "you do not have it to the extent of me." --> CHECK: has 
\i she
\i0  promised him, or has 
\i he
\i0  promised her?  \
5. v\'e2 is used as a pro-verb for m\'e2\uc0\u660 . The \sub v\nosupersub V q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  'again' indicates that the action is an 
\i alternative one
\i0 . \
6. Lit: "do it, do it!"\
7. Notice the use of the Pvnf k\'e0\uc0\u660  after the qha-d\u603 \u768 \u660 .\
8. She (\'9au 
\f1 \uc0\u42890 
\f0  the other one) doesn't want to court this fellow very much, my friend." I.e., he (= C\'e0l\uc0\u596 \u770 ) must have had a bad experience with his girl-friend before, which explains his timidity this time.\
9. <ca qh\uc0\u596 \u770  ca na> "have a t\'eate-\'e0-t\'eate" 
\f1 \uc0\u42890 
\f0  "go secretly go listen." qh\uc0\u596 \u770 -na ve 'talk secretly."\
10. m\uc0\u616 \u770 \u660  d\'e0\u660  ve 'be familiar with one another.' m\u616 \u768 \u660  < Shan.\
11. The interjection \'e2loo implies "My God, how stupid can you get!"\
12. Lahu houses are on stilts, and there are cracks between the floorboards. CHECK g\'f2. The traditional signal seems not to be devoid of sexual significance. \
13. v\'e2 is here a pro-verb for q\'f4\uc0\u660 . \
14. I.e., we can't be coy like her, but must lay over cards on the table first. \
15. Lit: "tonight, you having thought what, came out here?"\
16. I.e., P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 .\
17. Lit: "one p\uc0\u103 \u776 obably cannot be competing like that"\
18. ni-ma m\'e2 ve "the heart is numerous"--i.e., the affections are not focused on a single object. \
19. The original has the numbers "16 or 17" in Thai. The somewhat comic, pseudo-learned  effect is approximated by the Spanish translation. cf. "number uno" in #_____.\
20. Lit: "does she know letters?"\
21. Lit: "reach, get to" (g\'e0).\
22. Lit: k\'e2\uc0\u660 , kh\'e2\u660 , y\'e2\u660  "our k, kh, y's."\
23. V + m\ul a\ulnone : "V for someone's instruction."\
24. n\'e0\uc0\u660 -\'fa 'conversation' is conventionally used, in letters to mean 'epistolary communication,' and in lovers' talk to mean 'amatory converse.'\
25. Throughout the 'quotations' from the letters, T-y uses the pronouns appropriate for
\i  indirect 
\i0 discourse, though we translate as if they were direct quotations. \
26. <y\uc0\u616 \u768 \u660  the m\u616  th\'e2>. i.e., 'night and day.'\
27. ni-ma t\'ea \'9a\ul i\ulnone  t\'ed t\'9a ta ve "to establish a single heart." Opposite of ni-ma m\'e2 ve (note 18).\
28. From a Lahu livelong. ch\'e8\uc0\u660  is an archaic / poetic word for 'food, rice.' It now means 'bite' in colloquial Lahu. If a metrical translation is preferred:\
	"This fine white rice I eat, it tastes like chaff--\
	Like muddy dregs pure water that I quaff!"\
29. Lit: "what time has it reached now?"\
30. "six o' clock" in Thai in the original. See Note 19.\
31. The word nail (<Shan <Bs < Pali) is used for 'o'clock, hour, watch, clock, timepiece, etc.'--anything connected with the precise measurement of time.\
32. l\'f9 ve: 'be broken, ruined, non-functioning'\
33. Lit: "however, because I have had the experience (j\uc0\u596 ) of getting to (\u103 \u776 a) use (u\u603 \u770 ) it, I do know the time."\
34. "I don't manage to go to Chiengmai, I don't manage to buy her one yet."\
35. Lit: "This time when I go to Chiengmai."\
36. P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769  leaves the sentence hanging, implying an apodosis like \u596 \u768 -ph\'fb a-c\'ed m\'e2 ve y\'f2 "the price is higher."\
37. "To wit (q\'f4\uc0\u660  qo \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone ), how, how did it go?"\
38. \'f4 ve y\uc0\u596  qo "if we \'9apeak about that, the Thai\'85."\
39. "It does not get my will at all." sa-ph\uc0\u596 \u770  'will' < Shan < Bs.\
40. The word \'e0-m\'f9 introducing a k\'e0\uc0\u660 -clause implies that one is conveying \{disturbing / shocking\} information.\
41. The word \'9a\'fa-g\uc0\u603 -l\u603 \u770 \u660  'cigarette' is a jocularly folk-etymologicalized loan < English. The first syllable has been altered to sound like the native Lahu \'9a\'fa 'tobacco.' The more standard Lh word for 'cigar' or 'cigarette' is \'9a\'fa-l\'ec\u660  'tobacco-roll.'\
42. "As for cigarette business, oh, don't say it!"\
43. A popular brand of Thai cigarettes: Kl\'e8d Th\uc0\u596 \u596 \u331 .\
44. d\uc0\u596 \u768  'drink' is used for smoking, too. Similarly, the causative t\u596  'give to drink' is also used for 'to offer a smoke to someone.'\
45. Lit: "if we offer one, it'll go."\
46. A village about 130 km (check) north of Chiengmai, on the Burmese border, the terminus of the Farng road. Here the Huey Tad Lahu usually spend the night before going on to visit their brethren in the Christian village of Sha-tu-deu, a 2.5 hour walk to the east.\
47. The girl is referred to simply by the pronoun \'9au 'remote 3rd person.'\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}