{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww27180\viewh14140\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 77a Wooing the Maidens (Part II)\
\
1. Somebody: 	ao
\f1 \uc0\u8308 \u8308 
\f0 	me
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u8309 \u8309 
\f0 	yau
\f1 \uc0\u660 \u8309 \u8309 
\f0 	n
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u660 
\f0 \'b2\'b9		ma
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u8309 \u8309 [1]
\f0 \
		take	wife	already	PRT/or?	you?\
		Are you married yet?\
2. T (C\'e0-bo): Well, we can get started now, we can do it now.\
3. Y\'e2-p
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 [2]: <Selections on the jewsharp>\
4. T: Ah, that sounds really great! Hmm \'97 maybe it wasn\'92t recorded[3].\
5. P (C\'e0-l
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 ): [IN ENGLISH] You have rubbed out \'97\
6. Th\'fb-y\'ec[4]: <Jewsharp selection>\
7. T: Wow, that sounds great!\
8. H: Well, the way we Lahu use the jewsharp [5], it\'92s for the young men and marriageable girls [6] to use!\
9. This blowing of the jewsharp is a language for courting the girls!\
10. When we call this Lahu custom of ours 
\i n
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -k\'fb-q\'e1 n
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -k\'fb-q
\f2 \uc0\u111 \u772 
\f0 -l\'f2
\f1\i0 \uc0\u660 
\f0  that\'92s just \{the sound/onomatopoeia\}.[7]\
11. If you just say 
\i n
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -k\'fb-q\'e1
\i0  it means telling the girls \'91Come!\'92\
12. The meaning is, \'93Oh, Lahu maid,[8] whether I\'92m worthy or not,[9] do come! Let\'92s try to have a conversation!\'94\
13. Otherwise, unless we go around blowing the jewsharp, unless we go and do that, no matter what our guys say, they <the girls> won\'92t listen.\
14. All around the village, at night[10] when you can\'92t see anything, even if we just go walking around,[11] when the sound of the jewsharp is heard \{twanging/buzzing\} in the distance,[12] all the girls say, \'93Oh, the guys \{are coming/are here/have come\}!\'94, and they want to come <out of their houses.>\
15. When a girl comes, they can \{talk/hold a conversation\} with each other.\
16. This custom, this blowing the jewsharp, if an older person should hear it, would be embarrassing.\
17. But one doesn\'92t blow it in \{the/a\} house.\
18. At night, when it\'92s dark, when you\'92re outside the house sitting on the ground chatting with the girl, that\'92s when you blow for her.\
19. A girl \'97 when a girl hears it, she knows \'93Ah, I hear[13] the guys coming!\'94, <that\'92s what> she\'92ll think in her heart.\
20. If she wants to flirt with the guy, even if she had been doing some work she\'92ll put it aside, and say \'93I\'92ll just go outside for a while, I\'92ll just take a poop.\'94\
21. So, since she wants to flirt with the guy, well, she just goes off to flirt with him.\
22. In the deep woods, at night even though people are sleeping, they\'92re not sleeping yet.\
23. So when they hear the sound of a guy blowing the jewsharp, it\'92s very melancholy, and they converse with each other to \{his/her/their\} heart\'92s content.[13]\
24. There are even some people who marry each other because of this jewsharp blowing.[14]\
25. Among us Lahu young men and women, the sound of some of them blowing the jewsharp is very pretty, they can blow pretty well.\
26. <But> some others, seeing other people doing it, just fool around when they do it.\
27. They don\'92t know the meanings or the sounds.\
28. Among us Lahu, there are even some people, some girls, who even if the guy is quite ugly, if he can do various things like play the sideways flute,[15] sing, blow the gourd-flute,[16] make songs, blow the jewsharp, then that\'92s just who they want to marry.\
29. Some of them <girls>, even if the guy has nothing, even if he\'92s ugly, if he has just one thing, a possession that she would like to have, a thing that the girl wants, then she\'92ll marry him.\
30. There are also people who get married even if they don\'92t want to have the <guy\'92s> body, but just want the thing <he has>.\
31. We Lahu have customs like this.\
\
Footnotes:\
[1] This sentence was uttered in Shan with a Lahu accent by someone fooling around. The sentence is transcribed and glossed as in my field notebook (1966). [Check: is the last word really \'91you\'92 or is it a yes-no qst. part. like Thai 
\i m\uc0\u462 i
\i0 ?]\
[2] Y\'e2-p
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0  (\'93Sonny\'94) was an unmarried teenager when this was recorded. He was the chief consultant during my 1977 fieldtrip.\
[3] 
\i kh
\f1\i0 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  \'91voice, sound, noise, words\'92 is used in two senses in #4: 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0\i -kh
\f1\i0 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0\i  d\'e0
\f1\i0 \uc0\u660 
\f0\i  j\'e2
\i0  \'91the sound is very good\'92, then 
\i \'e2 c
\f1\i0 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0\i  ve kh
\f1\i0 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  \'91probably doesn\'92t have/not there\'92 (i.e., probably not recorded), where 
\i kh
\f1\i0 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  means \'91the probable reason why\'92. See DL pp. 380-383.\
[4] Th\'fb-y\'ec, another young man who was a good friend in 1965-6, died soon after, reputedly because of black magic. See DL: 681.\
[5] Now often euphemistically called \'93jawharp\'94 in English. For details on this Lahu musical instrument see DL: 85 and Plate 2.\
[6] ch
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 -h\'e1 \'91young man, bachelor\'92; y\'e2-m\'ee-h\'e1 \'91marriageable young woman\'92\
[7] These seven syllables are meant to imitate the twanging of the jewsharp, as the Headman says. But some people etymologize the syllables 
\i n
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -k\'fb 
\i0 as 
\i na k\'f9
\i0  (
\i na
\i0  Bn \'91morpheme in female names\'92), 
\i k\'f9
\i0  (V) \'91call\'92, i.e. \'93girl-calling\'94.\
[8] L\'e2h
\f2 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0 -ma \'f2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : a formulaic term of address in courtship.\
	        VOC\
[9] qh\'e2 m\'e2 qh\'e2 th
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 : \'93worthy-not-worthy-even\'94. qh\'e2 (Vadj) \'91have good qualities\'92.\
     Vadj NEG Vadj Punf\
[10] t\'e2-kh
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u770 
\f0  \'91at night\'92 < Shan (cf. Si. th\'e1\uc0\u331  khyyn) is sometimes used instead of native Lahu m\'fb ph\u601 \u768 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  th\'e2 (lit. \'93when the heavens are revealed\'94). See DL: 998.\
[11] I.e., without going into any girl\'92s house.\
[12] The intensifying particle qha-p\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  is used in situations where hearing or not hearing is the issue. (See DL: 272).\
[13] ni-qh\'e2 \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f0  ve: lit. \'93heart\'92s path is stable\'94.\
[14] \'e1-th\'e2 m\'ea
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  d\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  l
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 : The reciprocal Pv d\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  here indicates that the jewsharp blowing is a mutual activity, involving the listener as well as the blower.\
        N  V  Pv  Punf\
[15] l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 -t\'fb(-q\'e2): single-tubed wind instrument, held sideways like a Western transverse flute.\
[16] n
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 : musical instrument with a gourd as resonating chamber, to which five bamboo tubes are attached with beeswax. See DL: 794 and PLATE #42.\
}