{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 82a The Smoke and the Non-Smoker\
\
83 H: Well, once upon a time there were two men.\
84 One of them was a tobacco-smoker, he used to smoke all the time. He was a great smoker.\
85 The other one didn\'92t smoke.\
86 His pipe \'97 the smoker\'92s pipe was a very fine one.\
87 The inside[36] of it was red and smooth, and it was streamlined[37] and shiny, so that the non-smoker wanted to have it, and stole it away from him.\
88 When he had gone and stolen it, the two of them then [a few words are inaudible] and they make a big count-case[38] out of it.\
89 They made a big case of it, they were fighting with each other, and (the time came that) they reached the great official \'97 the lord \'97 the king[39] \'97 and this king was a very shrewd man.[40]\
90 He made the non-smoker \{make a /wad of\} tobacco, to put in the pipe.\
91 And he had the smoker crumple some tobacco too.\
92 \'93Both of you crumple it and put it down here,\'94 he said.\
93 He didn\'92t have them wad it up one tobacco \'97 er, I mean one 
\i man
\i0  after the other[42] [while they were there] together.\
94 [Rather] he summoned one man at a time and had him \{crumple it / wad it up\} \'97 the tobacco.\
95 Well, then, after the tobacco had been wadded and place [before him], he summoned the smoker.\
96 \'93Come here, you!\'94 he said to the owner of the pipe. He came.\
97 Then he summoned the one who had stolen the pipe too.\
98 \'93Come here!\'94 he said.\
99 \'93If you smoke a pipe \'97 er, you, if the pipe is really yours, try putting the tobacco you wadded into it,\'94 he said.\
100 When he said \'93Try putting it in,\'94 they went at it with a will[43] \'97 and the one the smoker had made[44] filled the bowl of the pipe perfectly.\
101 The non-smoker\'92s one was a big lump like this\'85 [45] \'85 because he didn\'92t know...\
102 He was jealous of someone else\'92s pipe, and stole it, and even made a court case out of it and went before the king, but he couldn\'92t win against the pipe-smoker!\
103 That fellow went and robbed someone else\'92s property, went and stole someone else\'92s possession \'97\
104 Then, after he had coveted it and stolen it, when it came to putting it to proper use,[46] he had no idea of how to do it.\
105 When someone forced him to make a wad for it, he crumpled up enough tobacco for \{anyone / a person\} to put into 
\i two 
\i0 pipes \'97 he didn\'92t know [\{how to do it / any better\}].\
106 He wanted to get a hold of his pipe so he brought the fellow[46] to court, thinking all the time[47] that if a serious issue were made of it[48] he would win.\
107 [But] it was in vain.\
108 He went and stole another\'92s property, and behaved like a miserable wretch.[49]\
109 But the real pipe-smoker, in joy and gladness, got [back] his possession.[50]\
110 That\'92s right, my boys! \'93Don\'92t go sitting on someone else\'92s stool,\'94 as the saying goes. If it\'92s not your own stool \'97\
111 T-y: (Teasing) Did you say \'93don\'92t go shitting\'94 or \'93don\'92t go sitting\'94?[51]\
112 Don\'92t 
\i sit
\i0 , I said! That man who stole the pipe couldn\'92t best the other when it came right down to it, in the end.[52]\
113 H: Mm-hm.\
\
Footnotes\
[36] \uc0\u596 \u768 -k\u603  1. \'91the innermost, hardest part of a log; the pith\'92 2. \'91the inside of a tube\'92\
[37] phi \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660  \'91flat\'92. Here probably refers to its elegant shininess. CHECK.\
[38] \'e0-m\'f9-l\'f3 ph\uc0\u603 \u768 \u660  d\'e0\u660  ve \'93to have a great case happen mutually\'94\
[39] The headman decides to make his story impressive by making the judge a king.\
[40] Lit. \'93as for this king, his cleverness was very great.\'94\
[41] \'9a\'fa ch\uc0\u616 \u770 \u660  ve \'91to crumple tobacco\'92 \'97 to tear off a chunk of tobacco from a large lump and squeeze it into a ball suitable for insertion into a pipe: only the owner of the pipe knew the proper size wad that would just fit into the pipe.\
[42] The headman\'92s slip of the tongue occurred at the beginning of the sentence, but the English word-order requires that it be translated late in the sentence.\
[43] \uc0\u103 \u776 \u596 \u768  k\u601  a l\u603 : \u103 \u776 \u596 \u768  is a lively v.V.\
[44] \'93The smoker\'92s one\'94 (\'9a\'fa d\uc0\u596 \u768  p\u97 \u772  t\'ea m\'e0).\
[45] The inaudible part of the sentence must mean something like \'93and wouldn\'92t go into the bowl, 
\i since he didn\'92t know 
\i0 its exact size.\'94\
[46] q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  the ve q\u596 \u768 \u660 : the first q\u596 \u768 \u660  implies the action takes place 
\i later
\i0 . the is a pro-verb for \'91wad up\'92 \'97 i.e., \'91do an action.\'92 The second q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  is similar to the Punf k\'e0\u660  \'91even\'92.\
[47] \'93all the time\'94 translates the reduplicated y\uc0\u596 \u770  \u103 \u776 \'e2 y\u596 \u770  \u103 \u776 \'e2 \'91he\'92d win, he\'92d win [he thought].\'92\
[48] \uc0\u596 \u768 -t\u603 \u768  \u596 \u768 -na the ve.\
[49] ch\uc0\u596  l\'f9 p\u97 \u772  \'91a ruined person, a person who has gone bad\'92\
[50] In case one desires to impress the moral more strongly, one may add 109a: h\uc0\u596 \u769  khi chi ch\u596 -l\'f9-p\u97 \u772  \'e0\u660  \'9au m\u596 \u770  qh\u596 \u770  ve th\'e0\u660  pat\u596  th\u596 \u772  qh\u596  m\u596 -chw\u603 \u770  y\'f9 k\u601  \'9a\u101 \u772  ve g\'f2 c\'ea. \'93And the king threw the wretch into jail for a long time, since he had stolen what belonged to another.\'94\
[51] The original says \'93did you say t\'e2 mi (= don\'92t catch) or t\'e2 m\uc0\u616  (don\'92t sit).\'94 The humorous impertinence is, if anything, enhanced by the translation.\
[52] Lit: \'93when the doing-thus time came, when the being-the end/last time came.\'94}