{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18220\viewh19880\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #83. The Three Lazy Men and the Princess \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b0 \cf0 Headman C\'e0-b\'ed
\i0\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 1 Well, then, let me tell you another story.  Listen carefully, everybody.\
2 Long, long ago, the story goes, there were some lazy men, three traders.[1]\
3 They were resting [2] in a certain place where several roads met, where three roads met.\
4 The first man [3], saying he was going off to trade, had sat down there [4], and would say "Ah, where are you going?" [to those who passed].\
5 One day another lazy man appeared.\
6 [In response to the other's usual question] he said, "Oh, I'm doing some trading." [5] \
7 "Have a seat here."\
8 After a while a [third] man came along [one of the] roads to the place where the three roads met.\
9 He arrived there, and they all had a conversation. \
10 "What do you do?," they said.\
11 "Nothing much.[6]  I go around trading," he said.\
12 "What are you good at?" they said.\
13 All of them were sitting there and talking back and forth. \
14 "Well, I know how to make crossbows," he said.\
15 "Well, then, you--what can you do?"\
16  "Oh, I know how to predict the future. [7]" These three men [were talking like that].\
17 Thereupon they said, "What do you have to say, then, if you tell fortunes? Try predicting the future, maestro! [8]" they said. \
18 Well, he spoke, screwing his mouth up from one side to the other [9]:  "Hm, in a short while, at midday, we'll see [10] that a hawk carrying a princess--a king's daughter--in his beak will fly over the lake here," he said, foretelling the future.\
19 "Well, didn't 
\i you
\i0  say you could make crossbows?" \
20 "Yes, I can (make crossbows)."  And he made a crossbow.\
21  Well, another of them said, "And what can 
\i you
\i0  do?"\
22 "I know how to swim," he said.\
23 As they were all talking like this, that which had just been foretold would come to pass.\
24 It would happen according to the prediction.\
25 So, the crossbow was all made, and they stayed there together.\
26 When midday came, there was the hawk carrying the king's daughter, and he was already over the lake. [11]\
27 So he took careful aim and fired off a shot, and they fell into the lake.\
28 When they had fallen into the lake, the man who could swim immediately struck out swimming, and by his swimming rescued the princess who was out there--the young girl.\
29 When he had swum back with her, the three of them made conflicting claims on [the girl].\
30 They were arguing over who would marry her.\
31 Everybody wanted to marry her, [and the fortune-teller said] "I foretold it, so I, the maestro, ought to marry her!" \
32 "Well, you couldn't get her just by telling your fortunes--I had to swim out and get her!" \
33 "If I hadn't shot him down with my crossbow you couldn't have gotten her by your swimming!" \
34 Thus the three of them vied with each other. \
35 You people think about it! Which one of them probably should have married her? Think about it, everybody. \
36 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : You mean the queen [12]? The one who shot [the arrow] ought to get her.\
37 C\'e0-bo: The swimmer!\
38 T-y: It's the fortune-teller who should get her! If he hadn't foretold it they'd never have known.\
39 C\'e0-bo: Even if he foretold it, if he didn't swim he couldn't get her.\
40 H: Well, they took the case to the king and told him about it--and how did it come out? Who was the one who created [this situation] [13] first? Was it the fortune-teller? \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0    \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0  Footnotes\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 [1] t\'e2(n)-k\uc0\u97 \u772  te ve 'to trade; go around trading.'\
[2] Lit., "sitting."  \
[3] Lit., "at first, one man\'85"\
[4] He sat down on his way, and didn't bother to get up again.\
[5] It is probable that the Headman reversed two sentences and meant to have "where are you going" come 
\i after
\i0  "one day another lazy man appeared."\
[6] Lit: "I don't do anything."\
[7] m\uc0\u596 \u769 -t\u596 \u770  th\'e8\u660  ve. There is apparently a folk-etymology here. m\u596 \u769 -t\u596 \u770  is prob. < Thai 
\i m\uc0\u596 \u780 \u596 -duu
\i0  "seeing master", but there are also Lahu roots m\uc0\u596 \u770  'be an elder; be venerable' and t\u596 \u770  'words.' \
[8] The Thai-derived vocative m\uc0\u596 \u769  'teacher' is used.\
[9] Fortune-tellers often speak out of the side of their mouths, to appear more impressive. \
[10] The benefactive verb-particle l\'e2 implies that the hawk's actions are directed at the men: 'for their benefit' in the sense that they will be the witnesses of the action. \
[11] Lit., "and he had gotten as far as above the lake."\
[12] P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769  uses the word h\u596 \u769 -kh\'e2-ma instead of h\u596 \u769 -kh\'e2 y\'e2-m\'ee.\
[13] ph\uc0\u97 \u772  may mean either 'pass by' or 'create' (both < Shan), though neither makes much sense here. The Headman brought this narrative to an abrupt close, but retold the story on another occasion. See Version II. \
}