{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww23380\viewh15940\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #84 A. The Buffalo-Bugger and the Rabbit Hunters\

\b0 [Tape VIII, Side 2]\
1 Once upon a time there was \{this / an\} old fellow. 2 He would go off to his wet-rice field to plow, spending the night in the paddy-field, along with his son, [but] his wife would't go [along].\super 1\nosupersub  3 One day a son of his, who had gone [home] to fetch some polished rice [for his father's meal], came back [to the field], and as he reached the edge of the mountain-field--I mean, the edge of the paddy-field,\super 2\nosupersub  he looked at his father--and there was his old man, screwing a female water-buffalo! 4 So the kid ran back home right away, and told his mother. 5 Then when the mother learned about this, she packed up some more rice to carry out and went off to her husband,\super 3\nosupersub  and there they were sitting and eating [together] \{outdoors / in the fields). \
	6 Now that day some rabbit-hunters came to the village! 7 Well, as they came chasing the rabbit, making a great racket, the old fellow asks his wife \{"What's going on there?" / "What are they doing?"\} 8 So the wife says, "they've come to beat that buffalo-bugger to death." 9 So all of a sudden, without even finishing his rice, he runs off fleeing for his life. 10 Well, as he was running away, the rabbit happened to flee after him in the same direction, and when they [=the hunters] saw this they \{shouted / said\}, "Come on, let's chase him hard!"--and he ran away with all his might. \
11 Finally when he had run [all he could] and he was \{at bay / at the end of his rope\}, he said, "But the gray buffalo wasn't yours! And the black one wasn't yours either!"\super 4\nosupersub \
\

\b Footnotes\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 1. As we see from the next sentence, his son would sometimes go with him, however.\
2. The speaker, more familiar with upland dry-fields than lowland wet-fields, says h\uc0\u603  instead of ti-mi.\
3. lit: 'to that old fellow.'\
4. The humor of the punch line consists in the fact that the old fellow now reveals that he hadn't confined his bestial propensities to a single partner, but had 'played the field,' as it were.}