{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww37900\viewh21500\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 85 God\'92s Word and the Recent Disharmony in our Village\
\
[Sermon: Pastor C\'e0-bo]\
\
1. What we \{must have/need\} is people who help others, and people who are humble in spirit.\
2. We must be able to have patience.\
3. We must be tolerant and broadminded.\
4. We must not say unrighteous or unjust things.\
5. Thus we have been taught.\
6. However, let us carefully consider what it says in the Bible about this:\
7. Even though all of us humans say this\'97although God has been teaching us his word, and is continuing to \{guide/lead\} us, why is it that we humans can say such ugly things?\
8. Why are we capable of uttering such things?\
9. Let\'92s think about this now.\
10. When I think about it, I am\'97that\'92s the way it is, right?\'97\{being/ acting as\} the leader who is guiding your whole \{group/community\}.\
11. But your friends, the brethren on the committee [1] \{are also like that/play a similar role\}.\
12. \{They/We\} are the ones who help the community, who guide it, who help people.\
13. However, do not [go so far as to] say that we in leadership positions are guiding and helping others.\
14. Even we for our part have in full measure done unrighteous things, been proud and haughty, gone against God\'92s will, and have lacked \{patience/humility\}.\
15. Therefore, since we \{behave/are\} this way, all those who follow us also have now <seen> their own strength \{grow less/diminish\}.\
16. For this reason all of us Christians must think things over.\
17. The disciple Paul says, \'93We \{must have/need\} in \{the/our\} community all the people who look after, care for, and help [others], those who are tolerant and broad-minded.\'94\
18. Anything which would break up and divide our community should not be considered by us. [2]\
19. We should not consider it.\
20. We must not consider things which would bring us to ruin and destruction.\
21. No matter how others may treat us, no matter how they may scold us, whatever they may say to us, we must remain humble and patient.\
22. We haven\'92t managed to accomplish [this] yet.\
22a. Let us consider why we brethren haven\'92t yet managed to do that.\
23. For what reason can\'92t we do it?\
24. In a certain place in the Bible it says \'93your heart, your soul, your strength and \{spirit/ health\} \{everything belongs to/all belong\} to God.\'94\
25. Give it all up to God!\
26. Yet for us human beings it\'92s 
\i my
\i0  heart, soul, strength and \{spirit/health\} 
\i my
\i0  wealth and property, 
\i my 
\i0 household\'97it\'92s all mine and I myself control it.\
27. It\'92s because of this [attitude] that we have not succeeded.\
28. What does it say in another part of the Bible about this \'93I myself control it\'94?\
29. \'93In your heart there is a sacred dwelling place [3] for the holy spirit.\'94 [Corinthians 3:16, 6:19 \'96 note by DB]\
30. Do not let it be a dwelling place for \{Satan/the evil spirit\}\
31. In that second part of the Bible it says that.\
32. But is our dwelling [i.e., body] place the temple of God\'92s Holy Spirit?\
33. This body of ours is Satan\'92s temple, Satan \{rules/controls\} it, we have allowed Satan to rule it.\
34. Since I all by myself cannot take care [of things], I let Satan rule me.\
35. And when he let him rule, and when Satan takes care of us, when he \'93improves\'94 us in his image[4], what happens?\
36. We quarrel and bicker with each other, we don\'92t get along harmoniously, we act contrary to God\'92s will, we cut ourselves off from what God has ordained.\
37. That\'92s how it has come to be within the hearts of us human beings.\
38. Besides this happening, now it\'92s become nothing but quarreling and bickering, fighting and squabbling.\
39. Today we\'92d like to consider this disharmony, people not listening to what anybody else is saying, all these things.\
40. Let each and every one of us consider this.\
41. If all this is according to God\'92s will, then \{fine/ all well and good\}.\
42. If it\'92s according to God\'92s will then we can continue this way in the future.\
43. But if it\'92s not according to God\'92s will, once we have walked on the \{path/road\} that is contrary to God\'92s will, we will \{be destroyed/come to grief\}.\
44. We will be ruined and destroyed.\
45. Besides being ruined and destroyed, we will not be cared for by God, and you can\'92t put your trust in \{Satan/the Evil Spirit\} either.\
46. The Evil Spirit will not help you, and God won\'92t \{care for/take care of\} you either.\
47. Our community will not make progress, will not prosper in the future.\
48. These are the things we\'92ll [have to] face.\
49. We who are Christians are all \{capable of sin\}.\
50. There is no one who is not a sinner.\
51. However, among God\'92s words it is said that one ought to respect during the time that has been granted for sinners to repent.\
52. We should repent \{properly/in the right way\}.\
53. My brethren, let us think over everything that has happened recently.\
53a. Let us consider this with extra special attention.\
54. What was it that we put our trust in that has made us become like this\'97was it because we did put our trust in God\'92s word that we became like this, or was it because we did 
\i not
\i0  trust in God\'92s words that we became like this?\
55. If we all had truly put our trust only in God\'92s words, we could not have become like this.\
56. We could not have become like this.\
57. During the past two years, because we loved and esteemed each other, \{happily/cheerfully\} helped one another, and listened to what each other was saying, we were able to do God\'92s work, that\'92s how it was.\
58. The reason is, during those two years, even though we didn\'92t give everything [we owed] to God, we gave him our hearts, so \{it could be that way/we got along fine\}.\
59. But now we can\'92t accomplish anything anymore.\
60. What it says in another passage, in Philippians, what does it say?\
61. We who have already become Christians should all have our thoughts, beliefs, actions, and hearts [5] on a single path. (Philippians 2:1-2 \'96 DB)\
62. And our hearts [6] should be united in love.\
63. What do you think, brethren, are there several different ways of loving?\
64. There are not.\
65. There is only one.\
66. As for beliefs, are there several different ways to believe?\
67. There are not.\
68. There is only one.\
69. We received but a single one.\
70. But when we \{think about/consider\} this matter, there are many problems.\
71. We Christians do not speak harmoniously one with the other.\
72. It\'92s gone so far that even if one person simply insults somebody else that \{sin/offense\} is never forgiven.\
73. Think about it.\
74. Jesus, the son of God, was totally free from sin.\
75. He sacrificed himself upon the cross for your sins.\
76. People spat upon him\
77. They beat him, they reviled him, they cursed him, until they killed him on the cross.\
78. What did Jesus say?\
79. \'93Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do,\'94 [7] Jesus said. (Luke 23:34 \'96 DB)\
80. And yet we human beings, even if we have only been insulted a little bit, we cannot forgive that \{sin/offense\}.\
81. How much this must sadden the heart of God!\
82. Everybody read [this] in the Bible and think it over!\
83. Our community going and splitting up is not according to God\'92s will. We cannot be content this way.\
84. The thing is, we must love one another.\
85. In another passage in John I [8], what does it say?\
86. In Chapter V, \'93Dearly beloved, the Lord Jesus loves us so very deeply that we ought to love one another.\'94\
87. Jesus would say that.\
88. The way Jesus loved, that\'92s how we ought to love one another.\
89. If we do not love each other, in the future how will we be able to do the work that will \{bring about God\'92s kingdom on earth/\'93make God\'92s country progress\'94\}?\
90. Brethren, there is nobody living on earth who does not make mistakes.\
91. [We] make mistakes.\
92. But even though we are prone to err, while God has given us the time to repent, we should all repeat and \{get on with things/continue as before\}!\
93. Just as I have communicated the words of God to you, my brethren, everyone ought to think them over and over and act on in the future.[9]\
94. My brethren, do not just think of ideas that will ruin us and split us apart!\
95. The thing is, if we entertain such ideas, besides its being extremely depressing, there\'92s another thing\'97it would be a hame for us in the eyes of others.\
96. The other day we were happily listening to God\'92s words, and together we resolved to unite our hearts, through thick and thin[10], in spite of how angry we might have been with each other, and we had made progress up to today.\
97. \{But/So\} today it\'92s all of a sudden like this, and our community has the idea of \'93let\'92s split up,\'94 which is inconceivable! [11]\
98. Therefore, in the future everybody should think this over carefully.\
99. When you \'93intend to act,\'94 think carefully.\
100. When you \'93intend to eat,\'94 sniff first.\
101. There is still time to somehow get better, to somehow have an easier time, to somehow come up in the world in the future.\
102. We\'92re not dead yet.\
103. God has not yet called us back to him.\
104. Within the time that has been allotted to us, let all of us think things over and continue as before.\
105. Today this is all that I have prepared about the words of God.\
***\
106. If there is anything that the headman or members of the committee want to let \{everybody/the whole congregation\} hear about, there is time.\
\
Footnotes:\
\
[1] k
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 m
\f2 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0 t
\f2 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0 : a group of respected villagers consulted by the headman and pastor on matters of importance.\
[2] Evidently serious disputes within \{Huey Tat/the village\} had led to a threat that some households would split off and form a village of their own (or join a different pre-existing one).\
[3] ch
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0 -k
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  bo-y
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 : \'91dwelling\'92 + \'91holy house, temple\'92\
[4] This translation is meant to convey the ironic tone of q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0  gu la ve t\'ea y\'e2n th\'e2 \'91when he then \{improves/repairs\} [us]\'92: 
\b gu
\b0  (V) \'91prepare, practice; mend, fix, repair; be cured\'92.\
[5] d
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -qh\'e2, t
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -qh\'e2, te-qh\'e2, ni-ma: \
think-path nom     act        heart\

\b ta
\b0  is glossed in field-notes as \'91thinking, believing\'92, and said to be < Shan th
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 n. But this morpheme does not appear in DL.\
[6] t\'ea ca
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f0  t\'ed: \'91one heart only\'92. C\'e0-bo here uses the Shan word ca
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f0  \'91heart\'92 instead of native Lahu ni-ma, interestingly preserving the Shan centralizing diphthong -a
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f0  (which has merged in Siamese with -ai, but which is still retained in Thai orthography).\
[7] More literally, \'93Father, they, not knowing, do this to me; forgive their sin.\'94\
[8] Couldn\'92t find it either in the Gospel of St. John, or in chapter 5 of The First Epistle general of John (Note: 1 John 4:11 \'96 DB)\
[9] te qay c
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  : \'91ought to keep doing\'92\
do go correct\
Vn Vv Vv\
[10] h
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 -th
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -\'9aa-th
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 : lit. \'93difficult-even-easy-even.\'94\
Vadj Punf Vadj Punf\
[11] m\'e2 d
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  t
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0 : \'93not think emerge\'94\
NEG V Vv\
}