{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 CharisSIL;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural


12 H: Hm, this old fellow your [just] told about--did he live a long time ago?[5]
 \
13 Kh\'f9-m\uc0\u596 \u770 : Yes.\
14 Th\'fb-y\'ec: Well, Khumaw, where would you like to go anyway?\
15 K-m: I've come to visit. \
16 T-y: Aren't you planning to go visit over 
\i there
\i0  now?[6]\
17 K-m: No, I came to visit here.\
18 T-y: Pa-eh, what about you--\
19 H: He's probably going to go around visiting on a day like today, Sunday. There's no sense in just hanging around[7]
--you shouldn't[8]
 just lie around \{blinking your eyes sleepily / lackadaisically\}! Get moving! \
20 K-m: We'll go count the girls over there.\
21 H: So you're going courting, huh?\
22 K-m: Don't' you guys want to go?\
23 T-y: Where to?\
24 K-m: Over there--you know.\
25 T-y: Over there, at Meh-Jweh--[9]\
26 H: Up there \'85. don't' you know the way [to get there]?\
27a  : See there! She's wearing black![10]\
27b T-y: \'85 I'm going to go. \
28 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : We have three of four people [who want to go]!\
29 H: Get together and go, get together and go, you young fellows. When I was your age[11]
 I used to go, all right!\
30 Kachin: You should please cut me in on the deal![12]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 [Laughter. Everybody talks at once.]\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 31 H: How many are there, did you say? How many girls?[13]\
32 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : There are four or five of them.\
33 H: Four or five?\
34 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Yes.\
35 T-y: How many good-looking ones are there?\
36 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : They're all good-looking.\
37 T-y: There's one who isn't so bad as the others anyway![14]\
38 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : There is one--she's a little better than the others.\
39 T-y: That's the one! The one for me! \
40       : No, no, no! \'85 She's mine!\
41       : Like hell she's yours[15]
!\
42 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : She's mine. I'll give you guys the inferior[16]
 ones.\
43 T-y: Well, in that case I'm not going--I won't go.\
44 H: I'll divide them up for you, I'll divide them up for you. As for Numero Uno,[17]
 she'll be for this gentleman. Numero Dos[17]
 is for this little mother[18]
, and this guy gets Numero Tres.[17]\
45 T-y: Hey, that's no good, Numero Uno is mine! \
46 H: Oh, you can't act that way! \
47 C\'e0bo: Good grief, you have no sense of shame[19]
! \
48             Numero Uno is mine!\
49 T-y: Well, don't fight about it like that!\
50 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : The one who is Numero Uno is mine, I tell you! She's not yours.\
51 T-y: You guys are friends, and there you are fighting!\
52 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : We're laying conflicting claims to a girl, see?[20]\
53 C\'e0bo: He says they're fighting over a girl. \
54 Kachin: Well, if you people don't want her, why don't you parcel her out to me!\
55 T-y: She's tiny, why don't you tell him! That "Numero Uno" of his.\
56 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Yes, Numero Uno certainly
\i  is
\i0  mine.\
57 T-y: Let's take her--if only we succeed in counting her.[21]\
58 H: Well, so this Numero Uno is a tiny one, is she!\
59 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : You guys are impossible, just impossible! We can't go on arguing this way.[22]\
60 C\'e0bo: Are you going to have a fight?\
61 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : We'll have a fight.\
62 C\'e0bo: Who was the first one to see that girl?\
63 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : I saw her first.\
64 T-y: After he saw her he said he'd give her to me if I wanted her! Right there on the road [was where he said that]!\
65 C\'e0bo: Then whoever saw her first, that fellow gets the good-looking one. As for the inferior ones, the ugly ones, we'll give them all to Jakeh and the Little Red Savage[23]
 here! \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 [Laughter]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 66 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : The Kachin said he'd take one like that.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 67 T
\f1 -y: 
\f0 Well, whoever wants that kind can have them.
\fs18 24
\fs24  P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 , let's you and me go visiting someplace else! It's not as if there were no other fish in the sea,
\fs18 25
\fs24  you know. Otherwise,
\fs18 26
\fs24  no matter how nicely we discussed it, we'd have to come to blows, friends that we all are. \ul \ulc0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 \ulnone 68 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : There are some over around P\'e1-l\'f3 and P\'e1-m\'e0\u660 .\
69 H: There are millions of them, I bet, when it comes to that.\
70 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Plenty of 'em, plenty of 'em.\
71 H: Oh, so you're very well informed, are you?[27]\
72 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : I know whereof I speak![28]\
72b       : I'll let[29]
 \'85\
73 Kachin: I know a thing about it too.\
74 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : Since there are pretty ones 
\i and
\i0  ugly ones--\
75 C\'e0bo: Well, if you observe how a female[30]
 does her work, and her behavior[31]
, then you'll know!--whether she has a kood[32]
 character or not. \
76 H: Look carefully [for a wife], my boys! It's not as if [you were buying] a basket[33]
 or something, you know. You don't get one today and throw it away tomorrow![34]\
77 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : They 
\i are
\i0  like baskets!\
78 H: According to the wise old saying, [a wife] is the "flower of the hearth and home."[35]\
78a C\'e0bo: [inaudible]\
79 H: [If you marry (inaudible) someone unsuitable] you're liable to get tired of being married to her. So watch your step! \
80 P\'e0-\uc0\u603 \u769 : If she doesn't have a good character then she's an old basket.[33]
 If she does have a good character, she's not a basket.\
81 H: Hm, well, then, why don't you fellows stop this business now. Let me tell you a story. Just listen. How about it?\
82    : O.K.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Footnotes\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 5. The Headman is just trying to get the conversation started again. \
6. I.e., 'wouldn't you rather go find some girls?'\
7. g\uc0\u616 \u770  ch\u603 \u770  "be doing for pleasure, be fooling around" vs. ca g\u616 \u770  t\'f4 "go around for pleasure, go on a round of visits."\
8. Clause + (m)\'e2 h\'ea\uc0\u660  o =  "one shouldn't + clause." Lit, "it is not (a case of) clause." See also below, speeches 46, 76, etc.\
9. The rest of the sentence is indecipherable, as is most of the Headman's following speech.\
10. This sentence was said at the same time as Th\'fb-y\'ec's speech 27b.\
11. Lit, "when I was like you."\
12. The Kachin is an older man, something of a clown. He was still single, since Lahu girls hesitate to marry members of different tribes. Lit: "Please share together with me."\
13. Less colloquially: y\'e2m\'eeh\'e1 qh\'e0-n\'ee \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2 c\u596 \u768  le q\'f4\u660  ve.\
14. kh\uc0\u603 \u770  ve < Shan kh\u603 n 'superior': "to be the best of a poor lot, to be comparatively good."\
15. the kh\uc0\u596 \u770  
\f1 + X: "what nonsense to say X!" th\'f4o 
\f2 \uc0\u42890 
\f1  p\'f2th\'f4o (Interj.), kh\uc0\u596 \u770  
\f2 \uc0\u42890 
\f1  'words.'\
16. \uc0\u596 \u768 -h\u596 \u769  "that which is below, something inferior."\
17. The headman uses Thai numbers for the rankings, for comic effect. This is rendered by the Spanish translation. \
18. The word for 'mother' seems here to be used ribaldry for 'guy' (CHECK)--a striking cross-cultural coincidence.\
19. Lit., "you don't even know the way of shame."\
20. v\uc0\u603  d\'e0\u660  ve: 'to vie; dispute a claim with one another.'\
21. m\'e2\uc0\u660  \u103 \u776 a ve 'to have one's courting crowned with success.'\
22. "As for speaking words, doing this way is not mutually possible anymore.""\
23. C\'e0-qu-n\'ed "Mr. Red + Naked." This is Th\'fb-y\'ec's nickname. [CHECK - who is C\'e0-q\uc0\u603 \u769 ? Is that somebody's nickname, too? Maybe they both refer to T-y]\
24. "If it's that kind, whoever gets, gets."\
25. Lit: "because it is not the case that there are [girls] only in this one place here."\
26. I.e., if there were no girls anywhere else.\
27. "Do you know very well?" \
28. "I really know!"\
29. All that is decipherable of this (probably obscene) remark is the Pvf expressing probability, n\uc0\u603 \u768 -\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone . \
30. \uc0\u596 \u768 -s\ul \uc0\u603 \ulnone -ma, lit. 'a female body.'\
31. <t\'e2-h\'ea\uc0\u660 -t\'e2-c\'e0\u660 > < Shan; c\'e0\u660  ult < Bs.\
32. C\'e0bo says t\'e0\uc0\u660  instead of d\'e0\u660 , imitating the Kachin's accent.\
33. <Kh\'e1-p\'f9 kh\'e1-lu> "baskets" CHECK.\
34. h\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660  means both 'get' and 'marry.' b\'e0 means both 'throw away' and 'divorce.'\
35. <y\uc0\u603 \u768 -v\'ea\u660 -qa-v\'ea\u660 >. \
}