{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww28600\viewh15300\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b 87 Candid conversation before Building an Airstrip\

\b0 1: I think this is funny.\
2: Don't laugh, mother!\
3: I'll be the one who asks. You people will answer. [About] how building the airstrip is coming along.\
4: You people are now making a landing place for airplanes in Shatodo village.\
5: Don't do it yet.[1] We'll talk it over among ourselves first. \
6: O.K.\
7: We'll talk it over first. Don't do it yet. '[We are] building an airstrip in Shatodo village.' '[Planes with] how many engines[2] do they say will be able to land?\'92 I'll ask you, all right? Then you guys will answer me, right? 'Three-engined ones can land.'\
8: Say that we're making a landing place for ones with three engines. Think carefully [before you speak]. Remember [what to say] and do it just exactly right! Otherwise it could turn out the way it did before with Jamu's father[3] \'97 he got stuck[4] and didn't know what to say.\
9: One person can say what sort of thing it is that's called an 'airplane.\'92[5]\
10: Yes, we'll say that over here, then you both should continue talking on that subject. Now this time keep everything in mind, please! [Laughs] In a minute we'll do it. \
11: It's going in already! Listen! Into the hearing-machine.\
12: I don't think it's going in yet. It's not going in yet. They're not doing it yet. \
13: Turn it on! We'll speak now. \
14: Now you can do it. \
15: Can we do it already?\
16: Just speak the way you planned it out a while ago, O.K.?\
17: Talk as loud as you can, please.\

\b Footnotes
\b0 :\
[1] I.e,. Don\'92t turn the tape recorder on yet.\
[2] Lit. \'93heads\'94.\
[3] The Lahu are teknonymous; i.e. they are frequently named as parents of their eldest child.\
[4] Lit. \'93his words were blocked\'94.\
[5] Lit. \'93how it goes with an airplane\'94\
}