{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13360\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 88 Building an Airstrip \
Shatudt
\b0  IX-1\
Dav 18: We are now making a landing place for airplanes in Shatudeu village. [Planes with] how many engines do they say will \{land / use the strip\}?\
        19: Well, they say that ones with three engines will land. But right now we still haven't even finished making the airstrip. We haven't finished \{hauling / dragging\} away the \{logs / trees\} we've cut down. And the lac stinging us is making [it's no good now] it hard for us now [at this stage of our work = 
\b o
\b0 ] us now, I tell you! [The lac palm has a stinging itchy substance on its bark which bothers the Lahu workers when they haul them away.]\
20: How many days will it [take to] be finished?\
21: Well, \{it might even be another week before it's finished / it probably won't be finished for as long as another week\}.\
[=Even another week will probably have to elapse before it will be finished.]\
[=It might even be another week before it's finished.]\
22: The trees haven't been burned off yet.\
23: Towards evening yesterday \{we chopped the trees down, the lac-palms / the trees were chopped down\}.  We did set fire to them, but they haven't finished [burning] yet. And that's because the people don't work all at the same time. [And that's because not everybody works \{at the same time / all together\}]\
24: Some days, you see, only twenty-odd [people], some days only thirty-odd [people] work, so [that's why] it's not finished.\
25: Isn't it done "one person per household," as they say?\
26: They say one person per household, because now \{our / the\} time to work--the time for planting the paddy--has arrived, and so the people \{change off / work in rotation\} with each other. Some days we've been split up into groups of twenty-odd [men] each to work--some days there are as many as thirty some [men], other days there are only about twenty. \
27: Ha! There are days when two people come [from each household] too! \
28: That's right, that happens, too. [Lit: that way, too]. \
29: There are also [times when] one person comes, aren't there?\
30: There are also [times when] one person comes.\
31: This business of splitting up the people [=workers] into two groups [means that] everybody doesn't go to work in a single bunch in the same place at the same time. Sometimes we even go [to work] split up into 
\i more
\i0  than two groups. Everybody has his own work to do [at home] besides. So that's how it is building the airfield. It's because of things like this that we can't get it done very fast.   \
32: It's been sixteen days now that we've been building this airfield, up to today. Even so it's not finished yet.\
Dav 33: How many liters of \{paddy / rice\} do you get a day for building the airfield--for working?\
34: Three liters we get. Plus six dried salt fish. Lately we've been getting four liters. [But] when we first started working in the beginning, no matter how we worked they only gave us 
\i three
\i0  liters of paddy a day and 
\i five
\i0  dried fish.\
35: That's probably not enough to live on, on amount like that. \
36: This evening I tried begging them, and I got five liters of rice. I got seven or eight dried fish, too. If you don't ask for \{it / something extra\} they don't give it to you. \
37: [\{Is this because / Do\}] they say that when the airfield is built you all will get to ride [in the planes]? \
38: Well, they say that when it's finished, even if we should want to go visit Chiengmai we'll be allowed to ride. They'll let us ride, they say. I don't know \{at this point / anymore\} whether this is true or not. \
39: Well, when a plane comes we'll just climb in for a ride! Even if they don't offer to take us! \
40: Because we've suffered for it, haven't we?\
41: We have suffered for it.\
42: Every home in my body is aching from dragging away the bamboo stumps and the tree stumps! \
43: A lac tree over there really irritated me [my skin] one time a few days ago. My forehead was so itchy I thought I would die. But even though I told this to the policeNB, and they said they would blast [it / the lac-tree] out for us [with dynamite], they didn't hurry about blasting [=doing] it away for us. Then today they finally did blast it out. But even so, it inflamed me [= my skin] again, would you believe it! (NB. The Thai Border Police was supervising the building of the airstrip.) \
Dav 44: If you chew up some raw \{sticky / glutinous\} rice and smear it on the place where the lac has irritated you, it'll get better, you know.\
45: Say, I didn't know that! \
46: By daybreak tomorrow it should be all burnt off. The fire's burning very hard. \
47: I doubt if it'll be all burnt off.\
48: It will be over. By daybreak. The inside part is all burnt up already. \
49: Burnt up already, is it?\
50: Well, I still think it probably won't be finished.\
51: The other day an airplane came, this airplane came--and came in the wrong direction and sank into \{the mud-hole / the swamp\}!  We had to lift it out again. A little plane--a tiny one, yea big. \
52: It's because he had never come before, wouldn't you say?\
53: Because he had never come before. the others would come down in a certain direction, but he came down in another direction and sank into the mud-hole.\
54: But you people managed to help him [get back to normal] again, so it turned out all right. \
55: This evening now I was working. And they still hadn't managed to blast the trees out yet. So far, we've only bored the holes [for sticking the dynamite in], and the police official says he'll blast tomorrow morning. \
56: Well, but he--er, but didn't he say that the ones we had bored before he would blast this evening?!\
[Simultaneously] 57: No. He's a real bastard. 58: What he said was--\
59: He says that he won't blast with a big grenade [lit: "a big fire-ball"]. It's wasteful, he says. When you just blast with a little tiny one--he says that these large grenades cost two thousand baht a piece. That's what he told us. \
60: All this about spending this much or that much, what do 
\i we
\i0  know about it! \
61: He ought to do the blasting for us.\
62: Eeh, this policeman is always chewing us out too! He goes around bitching at us all the time, this policeman. \
[Simultaneously] 63: Even if he spends that much it's not his money! It's the government's money! 64: He's a pain in the neck.\
65: They gave it [the dynamite] to him to blast with. He ought to blast. \
66: But that's all he keeps telling us, you see! \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc
\cf0 [A pause] \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Dav 67: Is there any more [to say]? \
68: Building this airfield we--it extends into our fields too, so that we even have to dig up all the rice we had planted. Because if we don't dig it up, there's nothing to be done. \
69: In that case you've just got to go ask for compensation [=the price of it].\
70: As for going and asking for compensation, he doesn't want to give it to us, because it's government land. "Never mind," he says, "extend your fields in any direction you please!"NB And so, since this police official is the boss, you go ask him for something and he gives you exactly twenty baht.NBB (NB. To make up for the land lost to the airstrip. Lit: "in whichever direction you cultivate onwards, cultivate onwards!" NBB. $1.00).\
71: You can't win. No matter how little they give us it's good if we get anything at all. [Lit: "no matter how much they give us, if we get that much it's good"]\
72: Let's make this place for airplanes to land, he says--but when does he say one will really land here, I wonder!\
73: He says they'll land one the very day it's finished--that's what he says, anyway.\
74: I wonder what they look like [iit: I wonder how they go"], flying-machines like that! I've never even seen one! Not in all my born days. [lit: "even when I \{was just coming to be aware of people's speech / had just become a rational being\}"].\
75: Say, friend, have you ever gotten to ride in one?\
76: No, I never have! I've been wanting to but I don't have the money. And nobody has offered to give me a ride! Someday I will try asking somebody for a ride, though. \
77: I doubt if anybody would 
\i offer
\i0  to give you a ride. "I don't have any money," tell them! "Could I please have a ride? I'd like to see what it's like to ride for a while," you've got to say to them. \
78: NB\'85 I'd like to grab onto a wing and try flying around. Even the shortest side of it is six cordsNBB long. I've never seen anything like it in all my born days. (NB. Two people were talking at once, so the first part of this speech is indecipherable. NBB. A 
\i l\'f2
\i0  or cord is the distance between the fingertips of the outstretched arms.)  \
79: The rear end of it was sticking upwards, see? He was going to drop some supplies and when he had the head of it pointing up--I mean, when he had the head pointing downwards and the \{ass-hole / tail\} sticking right up he let the stuff come falling down! [Titters]\
Paul 80: Didn't it fall into the River KokNB? (NB. The N\'e1am Kok, a river south of the village, [tributary of Mekong?], nearly forming the Thai-Burmese border at certain points.)\
81: Yesterday they were dropping things again and they almost hit people! (laughing) If it hits you, you die.\
82: Well then, when it's coming you should go run off and stay under a tree. Otherwise you might get hit. \
Dav 83: When the three-headed airplane lands, you ought to touch it carefully, stroke it carefully, and look it over carefully, too. While it's coming down from above, its top, its bottom, its surface you should all carefully--\
[There are several people talking at once during speeches 84-90]\
84: Why, its body you \'85\
85: And you ought to look it over carefully, too.\
86: \'85\
87: It's beautiful to look at.\
88: \'85\
89: That's what it's like, what we call an 'airplane.'\
90: Well, when that big airplane comes down to a stop, I want to look at it--give it a good once-over. It's very beautiful\
Paul 91: This airplane, who do they say made it? Do they say that Lahu made it? \
<laughter>\
92: It is said that white men made it.\
Paul 93: Someday in the future the Lahu will be able to make them too, these airplanes. \
Dav 94: And they'll fly [=go]! That is, some day. If we build them. \
95: Come on, the Lahu can't do it. The Lahu have no education. \
96: Well, you're wrong! Two of our people are already [away] studying now. \
Paul 97: You just go cut some bamboo tubes and put in some \{gas / oil\} and set it alight and there you are! It doesn't matter if it goes (flies) or not. \
98: If it's Jalaw, he probably 
\i could
\i0  do it (at that). \
99: Sure it could be done. But all we know is its 
\i shape
\i0 . It wouldn't be able to fly around in the air. \
100: Well, a lorry now, even a Lahu could make one, I bet. \
101: It goes gliding along the ground, a lorry.\
102: We'd scoop out a nice hole in a log, eh? [laughs]\
103: But everybody has his own lorry, you know! The lorry that your father and mother gave you. The one you go walking around on every day! [One's
\b  
\b0 legs]\
Dav 104: That's a good one! \
105: That's a good one.\
106: It can't run out of gas. And it can't break down either, right?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc
\cf0 [Pause]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 107: I guess we're all finished now.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc
\cf0 ***\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 108: Hurry up and do it! \
109: ---\
110: Granddad, you're an old man, \{don't / you shouldn't\} (get up to) work so early every morning! You're liable to catch malaria. \
Old man 111: I won't catch it. Since I'm a man who's used to staying in the water all the time.\
112: This old fellow now, when \{he really gets the urge / he really wants to\} they say he even goes off before daybreak, off to the fields.\
Old man 113: I do it because I"m afraid otherwise I won't get anything [any rice] to eat.\
Dav 114: I wouldn't be surprised if he \{played the / acted like a\} young lover too.\
Old man 115: \{Not me, not me / I don't, I don't\}.\
116: You do. We know all about you.\
117: He's trying to handle two things (at once). The airstrip and his fields. \
One of the young guys 118: I tell you, in the mornings I can't move a muscle ["shake"]. In the [afternoons] I \{work on / build\} the airstrip, chop out \{root-knots / knots of roots\}, chop down stumps ___________. In the mornings I can't move a muscle\'85. Well, this old guy is probably playing the lover. Just like the Pastor said, eh?\
119: In the morning, when it's just getting light enough (for him) to see--\
120: I wouldn't be surprised if he was playing around a little. \
121: He's a very hard worker.\
122: When it's just getting light enough to see a little bit, he's \{off / gone\}, this old guy.\
123: Say, granddad, aren't you tired from working on the airstrip on top of hoeing your fields?\
Old man 124: I'm not tired (at all). I'm not sick, you know. \
125: Goddam, even young guys like us are so tired from working on the airstrip that we can't move a muscle in the mornings. By the time we can get up the sun is already way up there! \
Old man 126: As soon as the cock crows I can't sleep, old man that I am. I'm worried that I won't have anything to eat. \
Young man 127: Young man that I am, I don't know anything [about all that]. I don't know about 
\b not
\b0  getting anything to eat. All I know is that when I'm sound asleep it's great to be sound asleep. I don't understand anything (else). [egging the old man on into sermonizing him]\
Old man 128: If you stay asleep you'll get no rice to eat! We've got to hoe our own mountain-fields on top of doing the government's work ["the masters' work"]. Early in the morning at the crack of dawn we've got to till our fields--in the afternoons we (must) do the government's work. \
129: These people of ours [=we Lahu] are pretty hard to \{reason with / make listen to reason / control\}. They [the Border Police] said to us "If you're going to work, everyday work at the same time!"--but while some [of us] are working, others are just looking on idly. So they told us, "When you work, 
\i everybody
\i0  [should] work [at once]! And when you rest [=sit], everybody rest together! Don't just stand around and gawk while somebody else is working!" The fact is, they said, "if your paddy-planting time comes before you've finished this work [the airstrip], you won't be able to plant at all, so hurry up with the work!" But, even so, they [the Lahu workers]'re very lazy. \
130: This weekend let's work together all at once, every soul in the village, and get it done! If we do finish it fast--\
131: If we don't finish the work, it will be the fault of all of us.\
132: If we do finish it fast, we'll manage to get our fields hoed [in time], see?\
133: Yeah, if we don't finish we won't manage to hoe our fields. \
134: That's what we said to that crowd. We told them to hurry up and work together, all at the same time--but they don't listen. Anyway, on any given day only some of them are at work. "Sure we work, sure we work, sure we work!" They say, but it's just not true. All they want is to go stay in the forest and spend the night there [with a girl]. Ah, these Lahu are hard to reason with! \
135: Yes sirree!  [In 
\b ____
\b0  dialect] getting together this weekend and working in a group--if we
\i  don't
\i0  finish, if we don't manage to plant the paddy in good time, by next year the village might even be [=breaking up] dying [lit: coming to not exist].  \
136: If there's not enough [rice] to eat that's what will happen. Each of us will go \{his own way / off for himself\} to earn a living. [Notice use of 
\b la
\b0 ] If such a time should come.\
137: Or else we'll even become thieves! If there's nothing for us to eat. \
138: Even if we have nothing to eat I daresay we won't be thieves. \
139: Well, people like us two now, no matter how \{we may get along / it may go with us\}, since we're "their people" (i.e., Thai citizens), since it'd be because we've done as they've ordered us, if we should have nothing to eat all we'd have to do would be to ask them to feed us. So you see, we won't do any of this speculation back and forth or talking back and forth! We'll (just) ask then to feed us, if we're going hungry. Because they've made us work for them--because we've become "their people."\
140: While the men are working over there [on the airstrip], let the 
\i women 
\i0 go do the weeding, I say. You'd think the women would be working at it every day. (But), they haven't even managed to hoe the weeds yet, some of them. And they haven't gotten to plant the paddy yet either. \
Old man 141: Next year we'll starve, I tell you. [if it's up to those women]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc
\cf0 [Laughter]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 142: These women [of ours] do work at times--some of them anyway. Some of them are lazy as hell though. If their husbands aren't working [right along with them], they won't work either. \
143: They're good-for-nothing then. [lit: "The don't manage to \{lick / eat\}"--their activities are ineffectual] They \{really want to work / insist on working\} together with the males, those women. \
David 144: They can't part from their menfolk!\
145: Even the menfolk are tired of their being that way. \
Women 146: ___________________________________\
147: I-uh- this year I haven't been able to plant a single seeding of pepper! Or even sesame either! In the days to come we probably won't even have any clothes to wear anymore. [Peppers and sesame are among the Lahu's cash crops--normally they sell them to the Thai in exchange for clothes, salt, etc.]\
148: I haven't managed to plant any peppers either.\
149: It's the same way with me. If I can't even get the weeding done how can I go planting peppers! I haven't even planted my paddy yet. [Note use of Pv 
\b \uc0\u97 \u772 
\b0 ]\
150: I only weeded for three days, then I had to go back to digging the aeroplane field again. [He uses an old-fashioned word for 'plane.']\
Women 151: I am 
\i too
\i0  a hard worker! I've tried to work--\
152: Ah, me! Ever since this [airstrip] work came up I've been weary to the bones! [lit: "[since] this work came up, [even if we] talk about being tired it's the most!"]\
153: That's the truth.\
154: It came up [right] at the time we have to cultivate our fields, the time for us to till the soil and plant the rice--so it's miserable for us this year.\
155: If this \{job / work\} hadn't come up this year, we would've taken [lit "carried"] a loan [of rice] from the Thai [
\b K l 
\b0 =Northern Thai] [as usual] and gotten as much [rice] as we wanted. [Note contrary-to-fact use of 
\b \'f2
\b0 . The Lahu of this village normally get rice on credit from their Thai neighbors until the harvest. Past this year, seeing that the Lahu were having planting delays, the Thai were unwilling to extend credit.] If they had only done this [the airstrip project] to us when the \{paddy / rice\} planting was over it would've been fine, see?\
156: If the paddy were all planted we wouldn't mind working [on the airstrip] every single day.\
157: Or else if they had even done it next year [i.e., after this year's harvest but before the next planting] it would've been fine as dandy. [But instead] this year we're going hungry, and if we just work for them over there (now) I don't see \{how we're going to get along / any advantage for us\} next year either. This year we starve, and next year we'll keep on starving. \
158: That's just what I told them [the Border Police], \{a while ago / not long ago\}. "Right now we don't have the time yet. Let us do it next month," I said, so then they said to me, "next month it can't be done. The raining season has already set in. If can't be done." \
159: We've got to obey them. Because the likes of us are a weak [lit., "little"] race of people. Our work is no match for the masters' work [=the government's work]. \
160: Mm-hm.\
161: This very morning a [Border] Policeman said that any of us, who wanted to work on the airfield on a permanent basis would get [be allotted] three liters of rice a day per man, without planting his own paddy at all, just working over there all the time. "Is there anybody who would want to do that?" he said. "No, there aren't," I told him. "If that's all you give ["make it"] it wont' be enough to live on. The reason it wouldn't be enough as everybody says, is that they have so many children they couldn't live on that much," I said to him. \
162: One person could live on three liters, all right. But it's just not enough to feed a wife and children.\
163: We have too many children for only three liters! \
Women 164: With lots of children three liters is only a mouthful. \
165: With my \{family / household\}, it wouldn't even 
\i be
\i0  a mouthful! Those three liters of theirs.\
166: As far as I'm concerned even three liters would be enough to eat. Since there aren't many people [in my house]. \
167: There are [only] three of you, so it's enough to eat. \
168: God, there are so many people in my family. At a single meal we use up four liters of rice!\
169: When we were just beginning to work on the airstrip we [used to] get tobacco to smoke, even. And we would get bananas to munch and candy too! [But] now, for the morning meal they don't give us a thing to eat! As for the evening meal, we get once cigarette and one piece of candy, and that's all. It's not the same now as it used to be when we were just beginning to work. They don't feed us properly! 1\
170: When we were just beginning to work--the amount of rice we got when we were just beginning to work was four liters. But now we don't get [that much] any more. 
\i But see speech 34.\

\i0 171: Four liters nothing. When we were just beginning to work we'd sometimes get even five liters, sometimes even as much as six liters, I tell you.\
172: Now we only get three liters out of it! Today now, there were eight Thais working [along with us] too. These Thais don't work very hard, you know! They're no good at working! When a Thai \{works / is on the job\} it takes him two days to clear away a termite hill--and even then it's not finished. \
173: Why, if we Lahu don't help them, those Thais can't even dig [take out] out a clump of bamboo roots. Tomorrow some people are coming from Ve-kheh*, and if more of 
\i our
\i0  people go too, we should get a lot more [work] done. (* Name of a Red Lahu village.)  \
174: [Once-Today(?)-see #179] these people from Ve-kheh chopped through a tree that was [standing] over there on the side and made it fall over into the middle [of the area that had been cleared]! These Ve-kheh guys. \
175: They can't even chop down trees, by God!\
176: They can't even chop trees--\
177: Because they chop without looking to see the direction! Those guys just don't \{aim / \{set / figure out\} the direction\} right.\
178 (Defending them) That's it. It \{happened / was\} because there was already another one (=tree) that somebody had cut down \{right next to it / nearby\}--[so there wasn't room to chop the second one in such a way that it would fall outside the cleared area].\
179: So tomorrow they'll have to drag it away. \
180: (Answering #178) You're wrong. If they had only chopped on a different side it wouldn't have turned out the way it did. (But) he chopped it on 
\i this
\i0  side [gesture] and it came falling ["entering"] smack into the middle. Or else, for God's sakes, if somebody had climbed up the tree and tied a rope to it, and lots of people stood over there and pulled it would've been fine. \
181: It was the climbing up that was too much for them! [They couldn't manage to climb up]\
182: Oh, come on, with all those people if one man couldn't make it somebody else would've. Besides if they'd only asked us to, then 
\i we
\i0  would've climbed up for them.\
183: _______________________\
184: We'll have to work again tomorrow (be back on the job again). We've got to cut away the green* root-clumps [by hand], don't we? Yeah, that fellow A-meh said, "Let's take that tree over there that you've already knocked a hole in, and blast it out too with a small \{stick of dynamite / grenade\} ["fire-pellet"]. Because if (we take) a 
\i big
\i0  change of dynamite and blast, the hole will be too deep, and if the hole's too deep [you'll have to spend too long scraping earth together to fill it]. You still haven't finished with [filling in the holes from] the last two, three, or four trees that we blasted! And if you just keep burning [the trees out by setting fire to them], he said, "it'll waste a lot of time. If you waste time that's how you won't be finished soon enough," he said. "So, if you explode a small stick of dynamite, so it only blasts away the surface, then if you just do a little cutting here and there and drag [the pieces of wood] away, and fill in the earth again, you'll be all done, right?" he said. <Check a-m\uc0\u603 h's identity, so we can get the pronouns right> (*"green" = not yet dried up, not dead, so hard to deracinate.) \
185: That official is a hard man to talk to, all right! \
186: If we make a little suggestion to him [lit: if we just say "like this"] he just curses us out. Today now, he said that one of us--you know, that little guy--wasn't working hard enough, so he told him 'When the day comes that the Communists get down here you're the one they'll make fertilizer out of!'\
Dav 187: It's because our people \{["are hard to talk to"] / won't listen to reason\}. From one point of view it was right that they [the officials] scolded him [the little guy] that way. Since he's a disobedient fellow anyway, and also doesn't understand their language on top of it, he's hard to deal with. When we [i.e., who speak his language] talk to him he doesn't \{listen / obey\}. And when 
\i they
\i0  talk to him he doesn't understand. What's tough is he doesn't do what you tell him.  \
188: He doesn't listen and he doesn't understand! Right?\
189: When they tell him "Don't pull!," he pulls. And when we try to say anything to him he acts as if he \{was / were\} above us. If there's something he doesn't understand, he ought to listen to us. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
 \
 }