{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18080\viewh17400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs34 \cf0 #90 Proverbs (see JAM 2006 
\i English-Lahu Lexicon
\i0  (pp. 449-450), and JAM 2011c).
\b0 \
\
Speaker A:\
1. OK, come on [1] \'97once upon a time sweet peppers\'97whoops! [2]\'97hot peppers, sweet sugar-cane, there are these two kinds of things.\
\
2. That is, sugar-cane on the one hand is very sweet.\
\
3. Peppers, on the other hand, are very hot.\
\
4. So, as they say [3], \'93People don\'92t die under pepper-bushes; they die under clumps of sugar-cane.\'94 [4]\
\
5. Then they say, \'93Dry branches make good tinder; the young make good servants [5] for their elders.\'94\
\
6. When you say, \'93If you don\'92t know what you\'92re doing, don\'92t go into an abandoned old field, [6]\'94 it means that bears \
    might come and bite you.\
\
7. When you say \'93Don\'92t knock out [the ashes from] a clay pipe on a stone,\'94 it means a piece might break off. [7]\
\
8. \'93A fair maid should not sit next to a youth; a fair youth should not sit next to a maid\'94, they say.\
\
Speaker B (correcting him):\
9. You mean \'93should not sit next to a 
\i bear
\i0 !\'94 [8]\
\
Speaker A:\
10. So then everybody should take these words of wisdom to heart! [9]\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
\
[1] This interjection, meaning 'come on!; let's go!' is a borrowing from Burmese (DL:341).\
[2] The speaker starts out as if he\'92s going to tell a story, then catches himself and launches into an explanation of his first proverb.\
[3] \'93As they say\'94 translates the quotative particle c\'ea.\
[4] I.e., misfortune often strikes when one is least expecting it.\
[5] c
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f0  l
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : lit. "eat by using others to work for one".  l
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  , lit. "lick", is used as an informal synonym for c
\f2 \'e2
\f0  'eat', both as a main \
     verb and as a post-head versatile verb meaning 'V for a living'.\
[6] h
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 : an old field now overgrown and reverting to jungle, where animals are likely to hang out.\
[7] Cf. Eng. \'93Don\'92t build a fire in a wooden stove.\'94\
[8] This is indeed the correct version of the proverb.\
[9] Lit. \'93everybody listen duratively to this.\'94}