{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 90 Laying up Riches in Heaven\
\
Pastor C\'e0-bo\
\
1. Once upon a time there was a certain person.\
\
2. This person was a great Tutoress [1] to a royal family [2].\
\
3. She was the one who took care of the nobles and who led them [in the path of proper behavior].\
\
4. Well one day (=night) she had a dream.\
\
5. What she dreamt was that she went up to heaven!\
\
6. When she arrived there, in this [heavenly] century she saw a very beautiful big house.\
\
7. So she went on, and when she got near to it she saw a person.\
\
8. She asked this person, \'93Whose house is this?\'94\
\
9. The person said, \'93This is the house of your servant.\'94\
\
10. When she went to another place nearby, she saw a house that was even more beautiful.\
\
11. When she asked about it, she was told \'93This is the house of your servant who takes care of the pottery.\'94\
\
12. \'93Well, if the houses of all my servants are as beautiful as this, mine, since I am a great Tutoress, must be even more beautiful,\'94 she though.\
\
13. Then she went on a little further.\
\
14. When she reached a certain point, she saw in a little dry riverbed a little tiny house thatched with ragweed [3].\
\
15. That town/city [4] was a beautiful one.\
\
16a. So she asked this fellow, \'93Since this is such a fine town, why would [anybody] go and build such a tiny house?\'94\
\
16b. When she asked this, he said to her, \'93This one is your house.\'94\
\
17. She immediately got very angry.\
\
18. \'93Why is it that all my servants have such beautiful houses, while the house built for me is only like this?\'94 she asked.\
\
19. \'93We built it with what you sent to us.\
\
20. \'93As for this [house], since you\'92ve only sent us so much, that\'92s all you\'92ll get,\'94 he said.\
\
***\
\
21. Today, all we Christians while we are living on earth should not accumulate wealth and property. [5]\
\
22. To the best of our ability, in order to attain beautiful houses in heaven, we should accumulate good deeds here on earth.\
\
[1] \'9a\uc0\u97 \u772 l\u97 \u772 -     ma-   l\'f3. \'93Tutoress\'94 is in the OED.\
     teacher-FEM-great\
[2] Probably a Shan princeling or a 
\i sawbwa. 
\i0 c\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 -c\'e0w < Shan.\
[3] A ragweed hut is taken as the archetype of a miserable place to live.\
[4] That surrounded the ragweed hut.\
[5] There was actually little danger of this in impoverished Lahu villages.}