{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14160\viewh21440\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 #90 Laying up Riches in Heaven
\b0 \
\
<Pastor C\'e0-bo>\
\
1. Once upon a time there was a certain woman.\
\
2. This person was a great Tutoress [1] to the children of a noble family [2].\
\
3. She was the one who took care of the young nobles and who guided them [in the path of proper behavior].\
\
4. Well, one day she had a dream.\
\
5. What she dreamt was that she went up to heaven!\
\
6. When she arrived there, in this [heavenly] country she saw a very beautiful big house. [3]\
\
7. So she went on, and when she got near to it she saw a person.\
\
8. She asked this person, \'93Whose house is this?\'94\
\
9. The person said, \'93This is the house of your servant who takes care of the poultry.\'94\
\
10. When she went to another place nearby, she saw a house that was even more beautiful.\
\
11. When she asked about it, she was told \'93This is the house of your servant who takes care of your children.\'94\
\
12. \'93Well, if the houses of all my servants are as beautiful as this, mine, since I am a great Tutoress, must \
      be even more beautiful,\'94 she thought.\
\
13. Then she went on a little further.\
\
14. When she reached a certain point, she saw in a little dry riverbed a little tiny house thatched with \
      ragweed [4].\
\
15. That city was a beautiful one.\
\
16. So she asked this fellow, \'93Since this is such a fine town, why would [anybody] go and build such a \
      tiny house?\'94\
\
17. When she asked this, he said to her, \'93This one is your house.\'94\
\
18. She immediately got very angry.\
\
19. \'93Why is it that all my servants have such beautiful houses, while the house built for me is only like this?\'94 \
      she asked.\
\
20. \'93We built it with what you sent to us.\
\
21. \'93As for this [house], since you\'92ve sent us so little, that\'92s all you\'92ll get,\'94 he said.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 ***\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
22. Today, all we Christians while we are living on earth should not accumulate wealth and property. [5]\
\
23. To the best of our ability, in order to attain beautiful houses in heaven, we should accumulate good deeds here on earth.\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
\
[1] 
\b \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 l
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0\b0  'teacher' (ult. < Skt. 
\f1\i \'e2
\f0 ch
\f1 \'e2
\f0 rya
\i0 ), -ma 'feminine suffix'. See DL:1175-6.\
[2] Probably the family of a Shan princeling or 
\i sawbwa. 
\i0\b c
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -c\'e0w
\b0  (< Shan "lordly lineage") is often used \
     to mean 'Christendom'.  See DL:512.\
[3] The use of the round-object classifier 
\b \'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0\b0  with 'house' is elevated style.  
\b y
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\b0  'house' is usually either \
     'auto-classified' (
\b y
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 \uc0\u768  t
\f1 \'ea
\f0  y
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 \uc0\u768  
\b0 'one house') or classified with the general classifier  
\b m\'e0
\b0  (
\b y
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 \uc0\u768  t
\f1 \'ea
\f0  m\'e0
\b0 )  .\
[4] A ragweed hut is taken as the archetype of a miserable place to live.\
[5] There was actually little danger of this in impoverished Lahu villages.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}