{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15840\viewh21360\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\i\b\fs34 \cf0 #94 The Fingerless Lord\
\

\i0\b0 1. Once there was a certain lord.\
2. Under this lord there was a high minister. [1]\
3. One day during the time this minister was in the lord\'92s service,  while he was staying close [2] by him, one of\
     his [the lord\'92s] middle fingers rotted and broke off. [3]\
4. When this middle finger rotted off he showed it [his hand] to the minister.\
5. \'93Minister, one of my fingers, one of my middle fingers has rotted off.\
6. What shall I do? Come here, and look!\'94\
7. When he said this, and when the minister came and was shown it, [he] said, \'93My lord, everything that happens \
    is for the best.\'94 [4]\
5. So the lord immediately became angry, and since he was so furious, while he was thinking [about what to do], \
    he took [the Minister] along far into a forest, where he [the lord] saw a place where there was a deep pit in \
   the ground.\
6. When he saw this place, he said to the minister, \'93Come here quickly, come here quickly! I wonder what that is over there!\'94\
7. And the minister rushed to come, and while he was straining to see, [the lord] slowly pushed him so that he fell into [the pit].\
8. After the minister had entered the pit, the lord continued on to another place, where he found himself face to face with a large band of naked savages who ate human flesh.\
8. When they saw him they wanted to eat his flesh, but as they were about to kill him, they said \'93Take a good \
    look at everything about this person that is different from other people [5] -- one of his middle fingers is missing.\
9. So we can't eat him!\'94, and when this happened, all of a sudden [the lord] realized something -- he recognized \
     his good fortune.\
10. So since he came to realize [the truth of] the minister\'92s [words] \'93Everything that happens is for the best,\'94 \
     he straightaway turned back for home and had the minister pulled out [of the pit]. [6]\
11. If we say \'93What meaning can we extract from this?\'94, everything that has ever happened, all the things \
      we complained and bickered about, are all for the best! [7]\
\
12. <Somebody says skeptically> : I suppose so. [8]\
\
Footnotes:\
[1] 
\b a-m\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 : < Burmese (cf. WB 
\f1\b \uc0\u660 
\f0 amat
\b0 ) \'91minister; vizier; high official\'92.\
[2] \'91While staying close\'92 translates the reduplication of 
\b ch
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0\b0  (V) \'91stay; be in a place; dwell\'92.\
[3] The Lahu verb-particle 
\b \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u101 \u772 
\f0\b0  (called 
\b \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u101 \u772 
\f0\b0\fs30 r 
\fs34 or the \'93
\b \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u101 \u772 
\f0\b0  of regret\'94 in GL) here signifies that the speaker regards \
      the verbal event as unfortunate. It is normally left untranslated.\
[4] 
\f1\b \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -bo 
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u772 
\f0  ve
\b0 : lit. \'93the advantage/grace\'94 is great. For a discussion of the different nuances of 
\f1\b \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -bo(n)
\b0  in the \
      animist, Christian, and Buddhist contexts, see DL 186-7.\
[5] 
\b \'9au l
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0  m\'e2 \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0\b0 : "not be the same as others' situation". This expression recurs in the common phrase 
\b \'9au l
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0  \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0  la \
    
\b0  \'91come up in the world; be as respectable as others\'92.\
[6] Four-verb concatenation: 
\b q
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  (vV) 'back' +  
\f2\b \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\b0  (vV) 'vigorous action' +  
\b t
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f2 \uc0\u770 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  (Vh) 'emerge' + 
\b  p
\f2 \'ee
\b0  (Vv) 'causative'.
\f0 \
[7] The high minister has the same optimistic view of the world as Pangloss in Voltaire's 
\i Candide
\i0 !\
[8] The narrator ends with the emphatic final unrestricted particle 
\b m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u772 
\f0\b0  after the declarative Puf 
\b y\'f2
\b0 . The \
      skeptical heckler substitutes the suppositional Puf 
\b n
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0  
\b0 for 
\b m
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u772 
\f0\b0 .}