{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12340\viewh19980\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 #95 The Trickster with the Talented Pecker
\b0 \
\
1. Once upon a time there was a certain person called Eh-Hk\'92eh (
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -qh
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 ).\
\
2. Day after day he would fish out his pecker [1] and trap insects [2] with it.\
\
3. When a fly would come within reach he would cover it up under his clothes [to trap it]. [3]\
\
4. Once it happened to be a honeybee.\
\
5. When the honeybee happened along, he tried to cover it up under his clothes, and it stung him.\
\
6. When he got stung, because where he tried to cover it up and where it stung him was the same place, he cursed it, saying, \'93This bee is a wretched foul bee!\'94 [4]\
\
7. So after that he whipped out his pecker again and managed to catch some insects [with it], then he went and set them free in a place where chickens were being fed.\
\
8. Right away the chickens pecked at [the trapped bugs] and nibbled at them [5].\
\
9. When the chickens pecked and nibbled at him he sobbed bitterly, that guy.\
\
10. So they gave him one chicken [as compensation].\
\
11. After he got the chicken he then went to a place where pigs were fed, and proceeded [6] to let it [the chicken] go free.\
\
12. So then the pigs bit it to death.\
\
13. When they bit it to death, he sobbed bitterly.\
\
14. Since he was sobbing so much, they proceeded to give him a pig\'97they [just gave it] to him.\
\
15. So leading the pig, he went and set it free in somebody\'92s cattle-pen.\
\
16. When he set it free in there, the cattle kicked it the hell [7] to death.\
\
17. So then he sat down there and sobbed with all his might.\
\
18. Since he was crying [so much] they gave him a cow.\
\
19. Leading this cow, this time he went and set it free in an elephant corral.\
\
20. So then the elephant(s) killed that cow of his.\
\
21. Whereupon he sat down there and cried his eyes out.\
\
22. Since he was crying [so much] they finally gave him an elephant.\
\
23. Then, leading this elephant he went and let it go free in a potter\'92s workshop.\
\
24. His elephant stepped on the pots and shattered them. [8]\
\
25. Since it had trampled his pots to pieces, the other guy [the potter] \{took/got\} his elephant.\
\
26. So then he sat down there and wept bitterly.\
\
27. While he was crying, a bird came and called out to him.\
\
28. What that bird was calling was 
\b kru-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  kru-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 .[9]\
\
29. So then he let fly with a potsherd, and he got it.\
\
30. He caught it, plucked it and roasted it, and it was very fat.\
\
31. Since it was so fat, he smeared the fat onto his pecker.\
\
32. As soon as he had smeared it on, his pecker began to sing.\
\
33. It sang 
\b kru-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  kru-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 , and no matter what he did it didn\'92t get better [10].\
\
34. But then, when he scorched [his penis] with the [hot] potsherd, he was cured.\
\
35. So then he took along some of that bird-fat and went to a place where a princess was doing some weaving.\
\
36. Then after he had smeared some of that bird-fat onto her stool [11], her pussy began to sing.\
\
37. When her pussy sang, it just sang 
\b kru-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  kru-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 .\
\
38. So then they sought all the physicians in the city to have them cure her.\
\
39. [But] no matter who treated her, she did not get better.\
\
40. Whoever it was who treated her, she was not cured.\
\
41. Finally they said to 
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -qh
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 , \'93Oh, if you can cure this woman, take her for your wife!\
\
42. \'93And furthermore, if you can cure her, you will be given half of the kingdom,\'94 they said to him.\
\
43. So then 
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0 -qh
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  went and scorched [her] with that hot potsherd, and she was cured.\
\
44. She was cured, so he got the princess, and also got control of half the country.\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 :\
\
[1] Since Lahu has only a single word for the sexual organs (
\b n
\f2 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  
\b0 \'91penis\'92, 
\b cha
\b0  \'91vagina\'92) it is a problem choosing among the myriad English synonyms to find the ones that works best in a given context. I here choose to translate 
\b n
\f2 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0  
\b0  as 'pecker', both because
\i  
\i0 it fits the jocular mood of the narrative, and because it suggests a connection with the episode of the 
\i bird
\i0  later in the story.\
[2] It is not clear what aspect of the Trickster\'92s organ was so dangerously attractive to insects.\
[3] 
\b \'9a\'f4
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -b
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0\b0  (V) lit. \'93press-cover\'94; \'91cover an exposed part with one\'92s clothing\'92.\
[4] 
\b l\'f9
\b0 ...
\b k
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f2 \uc0\u770 
\f0\b0  is an elaborate couplet (
\b l\'f9
\b0  'be ruined', 
\b k
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f2 \uc0\u770 
\f0\b0  'be rotten', occurring in a large number of similar expressions, e.g. 
\b y
\f2 \'e2
\f0 -l\'f9-y
\f2 \'e2
\f0 -k
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f2 \uc0\u770 
\f0\b0  'little brat' (
\b y
\f2 \'e2
\f0\b0  'child'); 
\b ch
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 -l\'f9-ch
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 -k
\f1 \uc0\u616 
\f2 \uc0\u770 
\f0\b0  'miserable person'.\
[5] The painfulness of this experience for the Trickster is emphasized by 
\b \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u101 \u772 
\f0\b0  (P
\fs26 v
\fs32 ) \'91regretful state of affairs\'92.\
[6] \'91Proceeded\'92 is an attempt to translate 
\b q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0\b0  (vV) \'91go on and do something else\'92. See sense #5 of 
\b q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0\b0  in DL:259.\
[7] \'91The hell\'92 translates 
\f2\b \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0\b0  (
\fs26 v
\fs32 V) \'91vivid/violent action\'92.\
[8] 
\b n\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -kh\'f4
\b0  \'91shatter by stepping on\'92\
[9] This imitative sequence 
\b kr-
\b0  does not occur in any other Lahu word. This binome is also used as a noun, to signify a species of dove-like bird. See DL:362.\
[10] I.e., he couldn\'92t stop his penis from chirping.\
[11] The raconteur leaves out any mention of the princess sitting down on her weaving-stool, but that is taken for granted.}