{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13020\viewh19040\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 \
97 The Lion and the Frog
\b0 \
1. Once upon a time there was a certain country. \
2. In this country there was a great forest. \
3. In this great forest there was an abundance of all beasts and animals. \
4. Above all these there was one animal called the lion who was the greatest by far. \
5. Well, one day the lion was roaming around in that country. \
6. Wandering around and around he said, "In this country there is no one who is greater or higher than I am! There is no one who can overcome me--not a single person!", so he said. \
7. When a frog heard him saying this, the frog said, "What are you wandering around for?"\
8. When the lion heard this he thought, "Well, here I am so great and I'm talked to like that!" \
9. And he got very angry. \
10. Since he was so angry he went to see who had addressed him thus. \
11. When he went to look, there was a big lake. \
12. In it there was growing a water lily. \
13. Although somebody was talking to him, the lion could not find him. \
14. When he had gotten near, the frog said again, "What are you walking around like that for?"\
15. Then the lion became truly furious. \
16. He rushed violently forward. \
17. When he got to the place, there was a frog sitting on top of a lotus leaf and talking to him. \
18. When the lion tried to bite him, all of a sudden he stumbled into the water. \
19. There he roared with all his might, with all his might he bellowed, so his heart burst and he died. }