{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15060\viewh10060\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 98 Resurrection of a Barking Deer and Fulfillment of a Prophecy\
\
[former title\'94 Barking Deer and Swallowed Berries, or He did it after all]\
\
1. Once upon a time there was a married couple.[1]\
\
2. They were very lazy.\
\
3. They didn\'92t work.\
\
4. So day after day they just stayed home.\
\
5. Well, one day came when they were getting hungry.\
\
6. Since they were so hungry, they went off into the \{forest/jungle\} to dig for yams to eat.\
\
7. While they were off to dig for yams to eat, they found a barking deer [2] that had choked to death on a wild gooseberry![3]\
\
8. So then the two of them, husband and wife, carried the barking deer back home.\
\
9. So they turned back and arrived home, and put it into a big basket for storing \{rice/paddy\}, and set some water on the fire to boil.\
\
10. Meanwhile their children were playing around stroking the barking deer.\
\
11. The kids were saying, \'93Are you the one that says 
\b p\'e9
\b0 ? Are you the one that says 
\b p\'ed
\b0 ?,\'94 joking and playfully stroking it.\
\
12. Then all of a sudden what was \{choking it/caught in its throat\} was stroked back into [4] it[s stomach], and it jumped up and ran away.\
\
13. So then this couple went to a fortune-teller [5] to ask a question.\
\
14. He [6] said to the fortune-teller, \'93Oh, master, will I be able to get my animal back, or won\'92t I be able to get it back?,\'94 he asked.\
\
15a. The fortune-teller said, \'93Ah, that animal of yours you cannot get back.\
\
15b. \'93If you try to do so, you will just have to lick your wife\'92s \'91thing\'92.\'94[7]\
\
16. At this he \{retorted/answered back\}, \'93Oh, you miserable fortune-telling sonofabitch!\'94,[8] and \{drove/chased\} him away.\
\
17. After this, when they reached a certain point [on their way home], rain came pouring down, and they got drenched and were freezing.\
\
18. When they got back home, the husband and wife both sat down in front of the tripod in the fireplace and warmed themselves by the fire.\
\
19. Then he caught sight of his wife\'92s thing, and stuck a finger right inside,[9] and it disappeared in there. [When he took it out it was all wet, so] he wiped it off on the tripod.\
\
20. When he wiped it off on the tripod, he [his finger] got bured, so he licked it vigorously.\
\
21. Then all of a sudden he remembered.\
\
22. \'93What the fortune-teller told me just now was true!\'94, he realized.\
\
Footnotes:\
\
[1] ch\uc0\u596  	t\'ea 	ca. The storyteller uses the singular 3p pronoun y\u596 \u770  in what follows when referring to the couple\
     Nqh	Num 	Clf \
[2] ch\uc0\u616 -p\'ed-qw\u603 \u768 \u660 : A small deer (
\i Cervulus muntjac
\i0 ; 
\i Muntiacus muntjac
\i0 ) about 3 feet tall, known as the best eating in the jungle, but now hunted virtually to extinction in thIland. Its cry, conventionally imitated as 
\b p\'e9-p\'ed
\b0  in Lahu, somewhat resembles the barking of a dog. See DL: 835.\
[3] qh\'e2\uc0\u660 -c\'e1-\'9a\u105 \u772 : 
\i Sesbanea sesbans 
\i0 or 
\i Phyllanthus emblica
\i0 . See DL:286.\
[4] This complex verbal idea (stroke back into) is conveyed by a three-verb concatenation: \'9a\'f4\uc0\u660        qh\u596 \u770 \u660       k\u601 .\
											           Vn       Vv        Vv\
												stroke go back insert\
Another way of saying this: \uc0\u103 \u776 \'f4-p\u101 \u772  	qh\u596  	\'9a\'f4\u660  	y\'e0\u660  e \'9a\u101 \u772  l\u603 \'85\
			        stomach	inside	stroke	descend\
[5] m\uc0\u596 \u769  \'91teacher; master; expert; possessor of occult knowledge\'92 < Tai *cf, Si 
\i m\uc0\u596 \u780 \u596 
\i0 ). See DL:1029.\
[6] The pronoun is not expressed, but the context makes it clear that it is the husband who is doing the talking to the fortune-teller.\
[7] 
\b m\uc0\u596 \u770  
\b0 \'91thing\'92 is here used as a euphemism. Cf. also the expression 
\b \uc0\u331 \'e0 m\u596 \u770  l\u603 \u768 \u660 
\b0  \'91lick my thing!\'92, where it is not specified which thing is meant. See DL:1031.\
[8] 
\b m\uc0\u596 \u769 -kh\'ec-m\u596 \u769 -t\u601 l\u601 \u770 \u660 
\b0  (ElabN): N1 + kh\uc0\u616 \u768  + N1 + t\u601 l\u601 \u770 \u660  is a template for forming abusive insults to N1. See DL:371. 
\b kh\'ec
\b0  \'91shit\'92 < Tai (cf. Si. 
\i kh\'eei
\i0 ); the origin of t\uc0\u601 l\u601 \u770 \u660  (evidently a Tai loanword) is obscure.\
[9] 
\b \uc0\u103 \u776 \u596 \u768  j\'fb\u660  ph\u603 \u770 
\b0 : 
\b j\'fb\uc0\u660 
\b0  \'91stick in\'92; the prehead versatile verb 
\b \uc0\u103 \u776 \u596 \u768 
\b0  and the posthead one 
\b ph\uc0\u603 \u770 
\b0  both convey a lively flavor to the verbal event.\
     vV Vn Vv\
    drag      send forth}