{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 101 A Lahu Thanks a Shan Lady for Rice Without Curry \

\b0 [Tape X, Side 1]\
	1 Once there was a certain man. 2 He went to clear land for a road.
\fs20 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  3 Because they made him go clear land for a road. 4 He worked and worked on the road, and when the time came to go back home, he was very hungry. 5 Since he was very hungry, he went to beg some food from a Shan. 6 So he said to the Shan: "Madam. \{Would / Don't\} you have some cooked rice?"
\fs20 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  7 The Shan said, "I have, I have. 8 I don't have any curry to go with it, though."
\fs20 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	9 So he said, "Even if there's no curry, I'll eat it." 10 Then the Shan [lady] ground up some peppers and gave them to him to eat. 11 When she had ground them up and given them to him, he ate and she felt him alone.
\fs20 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  12 As she was learning, the Shan said
\fs20 \super 3.5
\fs24 \nosupersub : "[Sorry] you didn't even get any curry to eat." \
	13 At this he [tried to] make [polite] conversation with the Shan: 14 "Though I didn't get to 
\i eat
\i0  any curry, it was still delicious! Many thanks to you, ma'am!" he said.
\fs20 \super 4\
\

\b\fs24 \nosupersub Footnotes\

\b0 1. q\uc0\u596 \u770  'hoe, work land.' y\'e0\u660 -q\u596  q\u596 \u770  'clear land for a road.'\
2. In Shan in the original.\
3. ph\uc0\u603 \u770  'to release, let go' leave.'\
3.5. formule de politesse.\
4. The joke seems to lie in the way the Lahu tries to use his best and most flowery than for the occasion, but ends up saying something ridiculous: he calls something 'delicious' that never existed. \
}