{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12600\viewh18600\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 #102 The Stupid Son-in-law and the Bonze\
\

\b0 1. Once upon a time there was a certain stupid person.\
\
2. He used to go and set traps for animals.\
\
3. One day when he was setting traps, an old Buddhist monk [1] who had gone there to pick \
    sticky berries [2] to eat caught sight of a barking deer [3] that had been trapped.\
\
4. When he saw the trapped barking deer, he set it free.\
\
5. After this, he [the trap-setter] went home.\
\
6. When he got home he said to his father-in-law, \'93Granddad 
\f1 [4
\f0 ], we must have trapped \
    somebody else\'92s calf!\'94 [5]\
\
7. So then he went back again [to set traps].\
\
8. Once again he trapped a barking deer.\
\
9. And again it was set free.\
\
10. \'93Granddad, I just keep trapping somebody else\'92s calf, and it\'92s been set free!\'94, he said.\
\
11a. This time the father-in-law said, \'93Granddad [6] tells you [to say], \'91Whatever it is, \
       it's my grand-dad\'92s pussy-cat!\'92\'94[7]\
\
11b. \'93Hurry and bring it [home]!\'94, he said.\
\
12. So the stupid guy went back again, and when that senior monk was picking sticky berries to \
      eat, this time he was waiting for him.\
\
13. So when he saw him, he cut down a cudgel [from a tree] and beat him with it.\
\
14. While he was beating him, [the monk] said \'93
\b kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  t
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u772 
\f0 , kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  t
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u772 
\f0\b0 !\'94[8]\
\
15. \'93
\b Kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  t
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u772 
\f0\b0  or no 
\b Kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  t
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u772 
\f0\b0 ,
\b  
\b0 it\'92s my old man\'92s kitty-cat!\'94 he said. [9]\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 :\
\

\fs36 [1] ph\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -t
\f1 \uc0\u111 \u772 
\f0 -m
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 : 1st syllable < Tai (cf. Si. 
\b phr\'e1
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0  \'91lord; sacred thing\'92). DL:888.\
[2] qh
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0 -m\'ea
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u105 \u772 
\f0 : lit. \'93mountain eye\'94, a kind of sticky tart whitish berry. See DL:302.\
[3] ch
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f0 -k
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -n
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 , lit. \'93dwarf deer.\'94 This name for the barking deer is \
     especially characteristic of Yellow Lahu. The usual BL form is ch
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f0 -p\'ed-qw
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0 . \
     Later in the text the variant ch
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f0 -qw
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  occurs.\
[4] 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -p
\f1 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0  (voc. \'e0-p
\f1 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0 ) means either \'91grandfather\'92 or \'91father-in-law\'92, according to \
     context. Vocatively it often seems best to translate it as 'grand-dad', even \
     when \'91father-in-law\'92 is understood.\
[5] The stupid guy is making two mistakes: (a) he takes the barking deer \
     for a calf; (b) he was not angry that the monk freed it, because he thought it \
     must have belonged to somebody.\
[6] Here the father-in-law uses the kin term as a 1st person pronoun.\
[7] The father-in-law, realizing that his son-in-law is not the sharpest knife in \
      the drawer, uses the baby-talk word 
\b m
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 -m
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0\b0  \'91kitty-cat; pussycat\'92  as a general \
      term for \'91animal\'92. The usual BL word for 'cat' is 
\b m
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0 -ni
\b0 .\
[8] Shan or N. Thai 
\b kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  
\b0 \'91beg, supplicate\'92; 
\b t
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u772 
\f0\b0  is
\b  
\b0 apparently a verb particle expressing\
      an urgent request.\
[9] The son-in-law treats the foreign phrase 
\b kh
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  t
\f1 \uc0\u601 \u772 
\f0  
\b0 as a verb compound, negating it \
     in the frame V
\fs26 1
\fs36  + m\'e2 + V
\fs26 1
\fs36  + th
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  \'91whether V
\fs26 1 
\fs36 or not\'92. This sentence conveys \
     a highly ridiculous impression with its juxtaposition of a foreign phrase and a \
     baby-talk word.
\b  }