{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 103 The Ferocious Elephant \

\b0 [Tape X, Side 1]\
	1 Once upon a time there was a certain man.
\fs18 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  2 He saw someone
\fs18 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  taking care of a grazing elephant
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  someplace,
\fs18 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub  [and said] "Friend, is your elephant dangerous--is he dangerous?"
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	3 "Sure he's an elephant! Sure he's an elephant!"
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	4 "Is your elephant dangerous? Is he dangerous, friend?"
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	5 "Sure he's an elephant! Sure he's an elephant!"
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	6 "Boys,
\fs18 \super 6
\fs24 \nosupersub  he says it's dangerous. Let's run!" he said. 7
\fs18 \super  
\fs24 \nosupersub "Vamoose, vamoose!"
\fs18 \super 7
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	7 "Where are you going?"
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub  [said the Shan].\
	8 "Vamoose, vamoose!"
\fs18 \super 6
\fs24 \nosupersub \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 Exegesis \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 [Another Lahu tries to explain the story we've just heard:]\
	1 What he was saying just now, see, [was this]: "s
\i a
\i0 -hai" means "friend." 2 Then "s\'e1 can n\uc0\u603 \u768 \u660  c\'e0 t\u603 \u768  h\'e2
\fs18 \super 8
\fs24 \nosupersub  means "In your elephant dangerous (c\'e0)?" 3. But to the Shan, "c\'e0(n) meant "elephant." 4 So it was as if he'd said "[In your elephant on] elephant" to the Shan.\
	5 So then, he was very frightened and ran away and reached a thorn-tree which he climbed up. 6 Once he got up to the top of the thorn-tree, he couldn't manage to get down again. 7. So somebody had to put a ladder against
\fs18 \super 9
\fs24 \nosupersub  [the tree] and take him [down].
\fs18 \super 10
\fs24 \nosupersub \
\
Note: Since the Lahu word c\'e0(n) 'ferocious, dangerous' is a yes <Kyam from Shan, anyway, it is hard to see how the Shan could have misunderstood the Lahu's intent. CHECK pronunciation of Shan 'elephant' as. 'fierce.' Maybe c\'e0 is native Lahu. \
\
1. I.e., a Lahu. \
2. I.e., a Shan.\
3. h\uc0\u596 \u769  'to lead to pasture; look after a grazing animal.'\
4. \'f4 h\uc0\u596  
\f1 \uc0\u42890 
\f0  \'f4 \uc0\u596  'there, someplace.' The narrator uses the variant h\u596  of the topic P\sub n\nosupersub  \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  for the sake of a triple pun with h\uc0\u596  'elephant' and h\u596 \u769  'care for an animal.'\
5. These sentences are in Shan in the original.\
6. This is the first time the narrator mentions that the Lahu has some boys with him, though this seems to be an important convention in stories of this kind. See
\i  Empty Cremuts
\i0  and 
\i A Good Cursing.
\i0 \
7. The Lahu here uses the Shan word p\'e2j 'go' to his companions. The jocular but urgent tone this adds is conveyed by the pseudo-Spanish 'vamoose.'\
8. The wording here is slightly different from that of Sentence 2 above. \
9. c\uc0\u616 \u769  "affix to, strike to, put against."\
10. The additional details supplied by the exegete in sentences 5-7 are by way of showing that he could have told the story better than the original teller. \
\
   \
 \
}