{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 105 Monkey-meat in Broken Shan \

\b0 [Tape X, Side 1]\
	1 Well, now, once there were two men. 2 These two men both went into the jungle, and \{got / caught\} a monkey--the'd gone monkey-hunting. 3 When they caught the monkey they went to sell the monkey-meat to a [certain] Shan. 4 The Shan said: "~~~~~~~?" 5 That means "Friend, what kind of meat is it?"
\fs18 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	6 Now the two of them didn't know the Shan language at all. 7 So when they were spoken to, they kept quiet.
\fs18 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  8 They didn't know what to say. 9 "You, you tell him!" they said (to each other), and they remained silent. 10 Well the Shan kept asking them "~~~~?" \
	11 Finally,
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  they said "Meat live in tree, meat live in tree!"
\fs18 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	12 But the Shan didn't understand. 13 He just kept saying "~~~~?" [=what kind of meat?] 13 "Meat live in tree" they said. \
	14 Well, he couldn't understand, he just couldn't, so finally one of the men [jumped up and] swung from [a beam in] the Shan's house while the other one fixed an arrow to his bow and aimed it at him.
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	15 Whereupon the Shan had to beg them [for mercy]. 16 "Now I understand, now I understand!" he said.
\fs18 \super 6\

\fs24 \nosupersub \

\b Footnotes\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 1. Presumably the Lahu either didn't have the meat with them, or else had butchered it beyond recognition. \
2. t\'e0-\'ed ch\uc0\u603 \u770  'to be silent.' t\'e0-\'ed 'silence' occurs only with the verb ch\u603 \u770  'to remain, be doing something, stay.'\
3. Lit: "when a time had arrived."\
4. n\uc0\u601 \u768  y\'fa m\'e0i: i.e., 'the meat of a kind of animal that lives in a tree.' The Lahu word for 'animal' and 'meat' is the same, but the Shan words are different (n\u601 \u768  'meat,' ___ 'animal'). The Lahu only knew the word for 'meat.'\
5. kh\'e2\uc0\u660  th\u596  ve 'put an arrow in a bow, crack a bow.'\
6. The Lahu were trying to make him understand by their playlet. The Shan misinterpreted their actions as showing hostility to him and hastened to assure them that now he understood (although he still didn't). The Shan's last words are in Lahu, but this is not meant to imply that he could speak Lahu all the time. It's just a slip of the narrator. Not even a slip--the language of the last speech is irrelevant to the impact of the punchline. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\fs18 \cf0 \super \
}