{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14140\viewh19220\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 #105  Meat live in tree!
\b0 \
1 Well, now, once there were two men. \
2 These two men both went into the jungle, and caught a monkey--they had gone monkey-hunting. \
3 After they caught the monkey they went to sell the monkey-meat to a Shan. \
4 The Shan said: "\'9aah\'e1y, n\uc0\u601 \u768  i-\'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768 ?" \
5 That means "Friend, what kind of meat is it?" [1]\
6 Now the two of them didn't know the Shan language at all. \
7 So when they were spoken to, they kept quiet. [2] \
8 They didn't know what to say. \
9 "You, you tell him!" they said (to each other), and they remained silent. \
10 Well the Shan kept asking them again and again, "n\uc0\u601 \u768  i-\'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768 ?" \
11 Finally, [3] they said "Meat live in tree, meat live in tree!" [4]\
12 But the Shan didn't understand. \
13 He just kept saying "n\uc0\u601 \u768  i-\'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768 ?"  \
13 "Meat live in tree" they said. \
14 Well, he couldn't understand, he just couldn't, so finally one of the men [jumped up and] swung from \
    a beam in the Shan's house while the other one fixed an arrow to his bow [5] and aimed it at him.\
15 Whereupon the Shan had to beg them [for mercy]. \
16 "Now I understand, now I understand!" he said. [6]\
\

\b Footnotes\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 [1] Presumably the Lahu either didn't have the meat with them, or else had butchered it beyond recognition. \
[2] t\'e0\uc0\u660 -\'ed ch\u603 \u770  'to be silent.' t\'e0\u660 -\'ed 'silently' occurs only with the verb ch\u603 \u770  'remain, keep doing something, stay.'\
[3] t\'ea kh\uc0\u616  g\'e0 e l\u603 : lit: "when a time had arrived."\
[4] n\uc0\u601 \u768  y\'fa m\'e0i: i.e., 'the meat of a kind of animal that lives in a tree.' The Lahu word \'9a\u97 \u772  means both 'animal' \
    and 'meat', but the Shan words are different (n\uc0\u601 \u768  'meat', sat 'animal'). The Lahu only knew the word for 'meat.'\
[5] kh\'e2\uc0\u660  th\u596  ve 'put an arrow in a bow, cock a bow.'\
[6] The Lahu were trying to make him understand by their playlet. The Shan misinterpreted their actions \
   as  showing hostility to him, and hastened to assure them that now he understood, although obviously \
   he still did not. The Shan's last words are in Lahu, but this is a narrative convention, and is not meant to  \
   imply that he could actually speak Lahu . }