{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 107a A Yellow Lahu Burns his Fingers\

\b0 [Tape X, Side 1]\
[107a-d originally told in Y.L., then translated into B.L.]\
	1 Once upon a time there were two men.
\fs18 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  2 [This is about how] one day the two of them picked some \{cabbages / mustard-greens\} to boil up for a curry:
\fs18 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  3 They got up to the fields, and when noontime came the two of them were looking for [something to] \{cook / boil up\} for a curry. 4 So the Yellow Lahu said to the Black Lahu: "Let's go boil up some \{cabbages / mustard-greens\}." 5 After a while they went and \{cooked / boiled\} the cabbage. 6 They cooked it, and it came to a boil.
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  7 After it was done, when he
\fs18 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub  had mixed up some salt and hot peppers [in a dish], he said "Friend, scoop out a little, will you?" 8 Then, after a few seconds,
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub  he \{repeated / said [again]\}, "Friend, scoop out a little salt, will you?" 9 Now the way the Black Lahu said it was because he didn't understand the Yellow Lahu dialect. 10 So that he [ended up] making the Yellow Lahu scoop out some 
\i cabbage
\i0 . 11 Well, it was burning hot, and the Yellow Lahu jumped--er, the Yellow Lahu ran away [in pain]. \
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. One a Black Lahu, the other a Yellow Lahu. See Sentence 4. \
2. 'curry' is our conventional translation for \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone -ch\'ee (lit., "rice-lifter"). i.e., 'that which is eaten with rice' (Thai k\'e0bkh\'e2aw). \
3. c\'e1 is a v.t. 'to cook by boiling'; b\uc0\u616 \u768  is a v.i. ' to come to a boil, be boiling, seethe.'\
4. I.e., the Black Lahu.\
5. Apparently the Y. L. hadn't understood at all the first time.\
}