{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 107b The Tiger is Getting Ripe \

\b0 	1 Then there's the one about
\fs18 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  how once upon a time there were two men, a Yellow Lahu and a Black Lahu. 2 They went along a road and reached the place where the Lahu fields were. 3 When they got there, the Black Lahu climbed up on top of a log [overlooking the fields],
\fs18 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  to see how the Lahu paddy was ripening. 4 Then the Black Lahu went [back] and said to the Yellow Lahu, "Friend, down there our Lahu paddy is getting ripe! 5 And there's paddy getting ripe up there too!" 6 Now when the Yellow Lahu say "c\'e0-m\uc0\u603 ,"
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub  they mean "tiger." 7 Thinking that['s what was meant], the Yellow Lahu took to his heels. \
	8 So then this Black Lahu chased after him, and they got up to the top of the mountain and finally came to a halt on the other side of the mountain. 9 When they got there, he
\fs18 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub  asked, "What did we see that made you go running away like this?"
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub \
	10 Then the Yellow Lahu answered, "Didn't you just say a tiger was coming?" \
	11 Afterwards the two of them had a good laugh over it. \
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. Lit: "after this has been done, once upon a time\'85."\
2. That the fields were below where the men were standing is shown by n\'f4 \ul \uc0\u596  \ulnone 'up there' in Sentence 3 and by m\'f4 \ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  'down there' in Sentence 4. \
3. The quid pro quo involves a three-syllable pun. In Y. L., c\'e0-m\uc0\u603  means 'tiger' and l\'e2 means 'come'; in B. L., c\'e0 means 'paddy,' m\u603  means 'ripe' and la is a P\sub v\nosupersub  meaning 'becoming, getting to be.'\
4. The Black Lahu.\
5. Lit., "having seen what, are you going fleeing?"\
}