{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11780\viewh16560\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #107d A Sticky Problem \

\b0 1 Then there were two [other] people, once upon a time, named Q\uc0\u596 \u768 -n\u603 \u769  and Q\u596 \u768 -\u331 \u596 \u769 . [1]\
2 One morning they were going along together, when [one of them] said: \
3 "Let's go parakeet-trapping early tomorrow morning, okay?"\
 4 So the next morning they went off together. \
5 When they had finished laying the parakeet-traps, a parakeet came and got stuck [2 ] on it--on [the trap] of Q\uc0\u596 \u768 -n\u603 \u769 .\
6 Thereupon Q\uc0\u596 \u768 -\u331 \u596 \u769  [the YL] said, "Friend, it's stuck [3] on yours!"\
7 Then, another one got stuck over on [the trap] of Q\uc0\u596 \u768 -\u331 \u596 \u769  [the BL].\
8 At this, he [4] said, "Friend, there's one stuck [5] on yours too!"\
9 Then the two of them got furious at each other [6] and began fighting. [7] \
10 As they fought, they ended up down in the river--and [all because] he [the YL]  had said "The parakeets aren't paying any attention to yours!" [8]\
\

\b  Footnotes\

\b0 1. Q\uc0\u596 \u768 -n\u603 \u769  is the Black Lahu, and Q\'f2-\u331 \u596 \u769  is the Yellow Lahu. The names are humorous, since n\u603 \u769  and \u331 \u596 \u769  are both verbs meaning 'to get stuck' in BL. In a previous translation I called them "Stickney" and "Stuckney" respectively.\
2. The traps were some sort of contrivance on which a sticky substance (bird-lime) was smeared to capture the birds. The traps set by the two men were apparently some distance apart. \
3. n\uc0\u603 \u769 . \
4. Q\uc0\u596 \u768 -n\u603 \u769 .\
5. \uc0\u331 \u596 \u769 .\
6. Actually Q\uc0\u596 \u768 -\u331 \u596 \u769  must have started the fight, since it was he who took exception to the word \u331 \u596 \u769 . See note to the next sentence. \
7. The misunderstanding arose primarily through the word \uc0\u331 \u596 \u769 , which means 'to stick' (=n\u603 \u769 ) in BL. but 'look at, pay attention to' in YL.  \
\

\b Clarification\

\b0 The prime source of the misunderstanding lies in the polysemy of \uc0\u331 \u596 \u769 , which in BL is simply a synonym for\
n\uc0\u603 \u769  'stick to', but which is also the ordinary YL word for 'look at', and by extension for 'pay attention to; set store by'. The confusion is compounded by the syllable ma\u32 \u770  in Sentence (8). In the BL's intention, ma\u32 \u770  is the general classifier for objects (BL m\'e0), in constituency with the numeral te~ (BL t\'ea) 'one'. The YL interprets it, however, as ma~ 'not' (BL m\'e2). Thus ma\u32 \u770  \u331 \u596 \u32 \u769 , instead of meaning '(something) is stuck', becomes 'is not paying attention to; does not care a fig for.'\
Although it is not necessary to assume any further punning to ensure the success of the joke, it is possible that the syllable te~ is also involved in the verbal play. It is intended by the BL to mean 'one', but it could have been understood as the verb te 'do/act' by the YL. Thus:\
(BL's intention)            t\'ea m\'e2 \uc0\u331 \u596 \u769  'one thing is stuck'\
(YL's interpretation)   te ma~ \uc0\u331 \u596 \u32 \u769  'acts as if he doesn't give a fig for'.}