{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11740\viewh16140\viewkind0
\deftab1134
\pard\pardeftab1134\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs34 \cf0 #108 The Stupid Son-in-law, the Red Ants, and the Rice Packet.\

\b0 \
1. Once there were two people.\
2. They went hunting.\
3. These two people, father-in-law [1] and son-in-law, were hunting porcupines.\
4. They arrived at an old-field [2] in a certain place, and the old man made his son-in-law follow a trail in the upper part of the field, while he went into the middle of the field.\
5. Then, when the son-in-law saw some red ants going up and down on a tree stump, he said, \'93Father-in-law, they\'92ve gone up already!\'94 [3]\
6. When these red ants went up, he said, \'93Father-in-law, they\'92ve gone up!\'94\
7. When he said this, the father-in-law climbed up, exerting himself he ran up that hill.\
8. When those red ants came back down again, he shouted loudly, \'93Father-in-law, they\'92ve gone down already!,\'94 so the father-in-law kept on running up and running down all the time, so he [finally] said, \'93Aw, this son-in-law is no damn good!\'94 \
9. Having run up and down like that he said \'93Son-in-law, lick this!\'94 [4], and he went back [to his son-in-law's house], and when he got there he met up with his son-in-law again.\
10. So he said, \'93Son-in-law, open up the rice that I wrapped up before.\'94 [5]\
11. \'93But you said \'91Eat it!', so I ate it up,\'94 he said.\
12. When he said this, the Father-in-law said, \'93Aw, this son-in-law is no damn good!\'94, and he went home [to his own house].\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 :\
[1] 
\f1\b \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -p
\f2 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0\b0 : etymologically \'91grandfather\'92 (< PTB *
\b b\uc0\u601 w
\b0 ), used also to mean \'91father-in-law\'92.\
[2] 
\b h
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0\b0 : a field previously cleared for a swidden, now reverting to jungle as it lies fallow. These old-fields were good hunting-grounds, since the regrowing plants provided good cover for animals.\
[3] The humor here resides in the father-in-law\'92s misunderstanding of what was \'93going up\'94: the son-in-law meant the ants, while the father-in-law thought he meant a porcupine. Yet another demonstration of possible ambiguity in a \'93pro-drop\'94 language like Lahu!\
[4] chi ve l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  \'f4
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 , lit. \'93lick this,\'94 a shorter version of \uc0\u331 \'e0 ve m
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  \'f4
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 , lit. \'93lick my thing\'94, is a frequent Lahu put-down more or less equivalent to English \'93kiss my ass.\'94 The second misunderstanding here resides in the polysemy of l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0 , etymologically \'91lick\'92 ( < PTB *m-lyak), but often used to mean \'91eat\'92, especially with respect to snack food. See DL: 1393.\
[5] Father-in-law had wrapped some rice up in a banana-leaf for them to snack on during their hunt.}