{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 110 The 'Empty Coconuts': the Lahu and the Shan Traders\

\b0 [Tape X, Side 1]\
	1 Once upon a time there was a certain man. 2 One day, leading a group of children, he went along a road. 4 As they were going along the road, they arrived at a certain place, where they saw a group of important-looking
\fs20 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  Shan \{traders / merchants\}. 4 Well, there were very many of these important traders. 5 When he saw them, he said--he asked the Shans [a question]. 6 What he said was, "~~~~~" 7 Which means "Sirs, friends, what are you carrying [with you]?"\
	8 At this a Shan said, "~~~~~."\
	9 So then he asked again: "~~~~?" 10 That is, "Sir, what are you carrying? 11 Then the Shan answered him again, "~~~." 12 That is, the Shan was saying "We're not carrying anything. 13 Our saddlebags are all empty." \
	14 Then \{the man / he\} said to the boys: "Hey, boys, boys! They say they're carrying coconuts
\fs20 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub ! 15 Wouldn't you like to eat some? 16 If you'd like to eat some coconuts, why don't you all chip in some money
\fs20 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub !" 17 So the've got some money together. 18 When he got the money they had collected, they said to the Shans, "Please sell us some coconuts." \
	19 At this the Shan said, "We have nothing to sell. 20 pao\'85.." 21 That is, "Our saddlebags are empty
\fs20 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub !"\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. l\'f3 < Shan lon 'great, big, important.'\
2. The word p\ul a\ulnone o (also < Shan - cf. Thai 
\b m\uc0\u601 phv\'e1an
\b0 ) means 'coconut' as well as 'empty.'\
3. phi \'9a\uc0\u596  k\u601 : 'collect (\'9a\u596 ) and put in (k\u601 ) money (phi).'\
4. CHECK. The Lahu gloss he gives is slightly inaccurate. The translation of 20 is simply "They're empty."\
 }