{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12100\viewh15560\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 110 The 'Empty Coconuts': the Lahu and the Shan Traders
\b0 \
1 Once upon a time there was a certain man. \
2 One day, leading a group of young people, he went along a road. \
3 As they were going along the road, they arrived at a certain place, where they saw a group of important-looking (1) Shan traders. \
4 Well, there were very many of these important traders. \
5 When he saw them, he said--he asked the Shans [a question]. \
6 What he said was, " "p\uc0\u596 -l\'e8, \'9aah\'e1y, \'9a\'fa h\'e0\u660  \'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768 ?"\
7 Which means "Sirs, friends, what are you carrying [with you]?"\
8 At this a Shan said, "ma h\'e0\uc0\u660  \'9a\'e1n. h\'e0\u660  p\u257 u l\'e1j-l\'e1j \u601 \u768 ."\
9 So then he asked again: "p\uc0\u596 -l\'e8, h\'e0\u660  \'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768 ?" \
10 That is, "Sir, what are you carrying? \
11 Then the Shan answered him again, "ma h\'e0\uc0\u660  \'9a\'e1. h\'e0\u660  p\u257 u l\'e1j-l\'e1j \u601 \u768 ." \
12 That is, the Shan was saying "We're not carrying anything. \
13 Our saddlebags are all empty." \
14 Then he said to the boys: "Hey, boys, boys! They say they're carrying coconuts2! \
15 Wouldn't you like to eat some? \
16 If you'd like to eat some coconuts, why don't you all chip in some money (3)!" \
17 So he collected some money. \
18 When they got the money together, they said to the Shans, "Please sell us some coconuts!" \
19 At this the Shan said, "We have nothing to sell. \
20 "p\uc0\u257 u l\'e1j-l\'e1j \u601 \u768 !" \
21 That is, "Our saddlebags are empty4!"\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. l\'f3 < Shan lon 'great, big, important.'\
2. The word p\ul a\ulnone o (also < Shan - cf. Thai 
\b m\uc0\u601 phv\'e1an
\b0 ) means 'coconut' as well as 'empty.'\
3. phi \'9a\uc0\u596  k\u601 : 'collect (\'9a\u596 ) and put in (k\u601 ) money (phi).'\
4. The Lahu gloss he gives is slightly inaccurate. The translation of 20 is simply "They're empty."\
\
The phonological misunderstanding here is especially interesting in that both words ("coconut' and 'empty') \
are Shan, but the Shans do not recognize 'coconut' in its Lahuized form, just as the Lahu does not understand the unborrowed word 'empty'.\
 }