{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12860\viewh18860\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 #111 Ananias Came to Grief (hymn)
\b0 \

\i <Pastor C\'e0-bo> \

\i0 1. At this point I would like us to sing [1] a hymn.\
2. This hymn is from The Acts of the Apostles, Chapter V, verses 1 to 5. [2]\
3. So now this hymn will be sung by two women, two mature women. [3]\

\i <Singers>\

\i0 4. It says in the Bible,\
5. that having lied, they died, Ananias and Sapphira. [4]\
6. When they were making offerings to God, the apostle asked him, \'93For your land \
    you only got this much?\
7. Is that the truth, Ananias?\'94\
8. \'93Yes, I only got this much. Truly I only got this much.\'94\
9. The apostle said, \'93Do not lie to God, Ananias!\'94\
10. Peter said, \'93Do not lie to God, O Ananias!\'94\
11. Suddenly Ananias keeled over and died.\
12. Sapphira also had talked it over with him in just this way.[5]\
13. For this reason the couple [6] both had to die.\
14. For lying, one must truly die!\
15. My brethren, for this reason let us cast aside all lies!\
16. Lest we end up like Ananias!\
17. The end.\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
[1] Lit. \'93do a hymn\'94. ch\'ee-mu-kh\uc0\u596 \u770  \'91hymn\'92, lit. \'93words of praise\'94 (ch\'ee 'lift up', mu 'high',  \
    kh\uc0\u596 \u770  'words').\
[2] gan\'e2n \uc0\u616  \'91chapter\'92 (\'93big number\'94); gan\'e2n i \'91verse\'92 (\'93small number\'94)\
[3] y\'e2-m\'ee-ma \'91woman\'92; ch\uc0\u596 -m\u596 \u770 -ma \'91mature woman\'92.\
[4] The relevant passages in the King James version are as follows:\
\

\i\b Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 5\
1. But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,\
2. And kept back a part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostle's feet.\
3. But Peter said, \'93Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?\'85\'94\
5. And Ananias hearing these words fell down and gave up the ghost...
\b0 \

\i0 \
[5] I.e., she had colluded with her husband in preparing the lie.\
[6] y\uc0\u596 \u770  t\'ea ca: the singular 3rd person pronoun y\u596 \u770  is used (instead of the plural y\u596 \u770 -h\u616 ) since the plurality is already indicated by the numeral-plus-classifier  t\'ea ca 'a couple'.\
\
\
\
}