{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 118 A Lahu Sells Wasp Larvae to a Shan \

\b0 [Tape X, Side 2]\
	1 Once there was a certain man. 2 One day he went into the jungle--one one of his frequent forays into the jungle,
1
 he found a giant-wasp's nest. 3 Then when night came he smoked the wasp's nest out.
2
 4 When he had smoked it out, he got a lot of them.
3
 5 Then he took these wasp-larvae and went to sell them to a Shan. \
	6 Now this person didn't know any Shan at all. 7 The Shan said to him: "Amigo! What are you carrying?"
4
 8 When he said this, [the Lahu] remained silent. 9 Then after a while the Shan said again, "Amigo! What are you carrying?"
4
\
	10 Finally he said ~~~~~.
5
 11 No matter how many times he asked, [he said] "~~~~~
6
." \
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. Lit., "during the period when he went time after time into the jungle."\
2. p\uc0\u603 \u770 -t\'f9 ch\'ee\u660  ve: 'to make a smoky fire under a wasp's-nest, so that the adult wasps will fly away and the edible larvae may be removed. \
3. I.e., of the larvae. The verb \uc0\u103 \u776 a 'get' is usable with no overt object as a quasi-technical hunting term measuring 'to be successful in hunting, to catch something.'\
4. "Friend" is in Shan (s\ul a\ulnone -h\'e1i), but the vocative particle \uc0\u48 \u768  and the rest of the sentence is in Lahu. \
5. The punchline is indecipherable. It appears to be a mixture of Shan and Lahu.\
6. The last few words are inaudible on the tape, but are probably just a repetition of the phrase in Sentence 10.\
  }