{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13420\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 119 A Lahu Gives a Shan a Good Cursing\

\b0 [Tape X, Side 2]\
	1 Well, once there was a certain man. 2 He met a
1
--er, as he was on his way to work,
2
 he met a Shan [woman]. 3 When he met the Shan,
3 
he had many people with him.
4
 4 Well, he wanted
5
 to say to the Shan "I'm very hungry, very hungry!" 5 [But] what he said was, "Madam, my stomach is very full!"
6
\
	6 So then the Shan [lady] said, "Since your stomach is full, why don't you
7
 lie down here for a while
7
?," and she got a pillow and put it down for him. 7 Well, he kept thinking that he would get something to eat, so he went on waiting.
8
 8 He waited and waited, [but] he still wasn't getting anything to eat.
9
 9 When [he saw] he was being treated this way,
10
 he got angry.\
	10 When he got angry, he decided he would curse out the Shan [woman], and said "Hey, boys, boys
12
! You run along ahead.
13
 11 I'm just going to tell this Shan off
14
 first!" \
	12 Then, after the boys had left, he said: "You damned Lahu! I eat your shit, sir!"
15
\
[laughter]\
13 Then he went off. 14 When he reached his destination,
16
 when he saw his people, he said, "I really told that Shan a thing or two!"
17\

\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. The original interrupted text has has "y\uc0\u596 \u770  p\'ee-ch\u596 \u770 --," lit., "he (topic) a Shan (object)." Since the verb does not come till the end of a Lahu sentence, but is required before the object of an English sentence, the Lahu \{sequence / frustum\} NP@topic@ + NP@object@ is untranslatable. \
2. Lit: "within (the time) he was going off to earn his livelihood (= eat)."\
3. Lahu narratives (indeed TB narrations in general) often use the device of linking one sentence to another by echoing the final clause of the preceding sentence in the first clause of the next sentence. See also below Sent. 9/10. \
4. Lit: "his people were numerous."\
5. The idea of volition is expressed by the P@v@ of intent a. \
6. He wanted to say something like y\'e2 khi n\ul a\ulnone  (
\b hiw
\b0  kh\'e2aw m\'e2ag), but aid instead p\'fa k\ul a\ulnone \uc0\u616  n\ul a\ulnone  (appropriate when one politely refuses the offer of mou food?-CHECK). The similarity between these expressions is more situational than phonological. The Lahu man knew a couple of Shan set expressions related to eating, but mixed them up.\
7. The durative nuance conveyed by 'for a while' is provided by the P@v@ t\ul a\ulnone , which may be used to indicate that the action of the verb will be prolonged or quasi-permanent. The 'why don't you' translates the suggestion-particle a~\'e1 (CHECK). cf. V@v@ a
\f1 -ni. \
8. I.e., he thought that the pillow was intended to make him more comfortable while he waited for his meal. \
9. Lit: 'he always couldn't get anything to eat.;\
10. Lit: 'when (they) did it that way (to him).' a-l\'e2 (No, probably just benefactive l\'e2) ~ qha-l\'e2 is an emphatic P
\f0 \sub v
\f1 \nosupersub .\
11. V + a-t\uc0\u603 \u768  te 'to decide to V.' See 
\i grammar
\i0 , _____.  \
12. His companions on the way to the field (See Sentence 3).\
13. "go fast!"\
14. d\'ea l\'f2\uc0\u660  'tell off,' lit. "scold (d\'ea) so it goes in (=pierces) (l\'f2\u660 )." \
15. The Lahu had intended to say "Dammed Shan! You eat my shit!" Further adding to the humor is his use of the Shan polite final particle l\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  (\u42890  Thai khr\u97 \u772 b), here translated "sir." The intended direction of coprophagy was reversed--one can imagine the poor kind woman's amazement. \
16. Lit: 'when he got there.'\
17. He uses the classifier for inanimate (m\'e0) instead of the one for people (\uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2). This is sometimes (as here) slightly insulting, though other speakers occasionally use m\'e0 in this sense with no such intention. 
\f0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\

\
}