{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 120 The Lazy Men and the Princess\
(Told by Headman C\'e0-b\'ed)\
\
1. Well, my brethren, once upon a time, as our ancestors\'97er, let us discuss and recount to each otehr the story of the four lazy men, shall we?\
2. Listen up well!\
3. Once upon a time, there was a lazy fellow who went around \{trading/buying and selling things\}.\
4. Since he was very lazy, he went along until he came to a place where four roads met, and sat himself down there.\
5. He sat down there by the roadside waiting for people to come, and after a long time another lazy guy appeared, right there, at the crossroads.\
6. When the two of them met, they asked questions of each other, and kept on waiting over there.\
7. While they were still waiting, another person appeared!\
8. Now \{there were/it reached\} three people there waiting.\
9. They still kept on waiting, all of them there.\
10. Since they were so lazy they just waited by the minute.\
11. Then\'97another guy appeared. There were now four of them.\
12. So they all talked to each other, and discussed things with each other.\
13. \'93So, what can you do, sir?[1]\'94 [somebody] said.\
14. \'93Well, I can \{tell fortunes/predict the future\},\'94 he said.\
15. \'93And you, what can 
\i you
\i0  do?\'94\
16. \'93I know how to make crossbows,\'94 he said.\
17. \'93I can make crossbows.\'94\
18. \'93What can 
\i you
\i0  do?\'94\
19. \'93I know how to swim,\'94 he said.\
20. Well, while they were all \{discussing these things/talking this way\}, one of them asked [the fortune-teller], \'93What is going to happen?\'94\
21. \'93\{Pretty soon/In a short while\}, around nightfall, the daughter of the ruler of that city there, the \{daughter of the king/princess\}, will pass above us having been \{bitten and lifted up by/lifted up in the beak of\} \{a hawk/an eagle\}.\
22. \'93You make a crossbow carefully!\'94 he said.\
23. They were staying near a lake, these guys.\
24. The crossroads they were at was near a big lake.\
25. Then, after he had finished making the crossbow, that princess who had been \{bitten by/carried in the beak of\} the great eagle passed above them.\
26. He cocked his crossbow and shot it off, and [the eagle] fell down with a big splash, into the lake.\
27. When it had fallen in, [the \{swimmer/guy who could swim\}] swam out and got her, that child\'97she was a beautiful maiden, they say.\
28. So these three guys argued with each other: \'93I got her!\'94 \'93No, I got her!\'94 they said.\
29. After they had \{gotten/retrieved\} the girl, they \{debated/quarreled/argued\} with each other as if in a court of law, those three guys.\
30. What should be done?\'97when they went to the great place, the great and mighty lords\'92 place, they were all arguing and quarreling with each other.\
31. Which person would win?\
32. \'93Me, me, I win because I predicted the future!\'94 he said.\
33. Thus they fought with [2] each other.\
34. \'93I made the crossbow, and got him [the eagle] with a shot,\'94 he said.\
34-A. \'93Yeah, I made the crossbow and shot it.\'94\
35. \'93I got her by swimming,\'94 he said.\
36. The three of them argued with each other.\
37. Arguing and arguing, they arrived at the palace and said, \'93Which person won?\'94\
38. \'93She was recovered by swimming, so the swimmer, the last person, is the winner,\'94 so they said.\
\
Footnotes:\
[1] 
\i m\uc0\u596 \u769  \'f2 
\i0 [vocative]: \'93O teacher.\'94\
[2] 
\i \uc0\u103 \u776 \u596 \u768  d\'e0\u660  ve
\i0 : lit. \'93pulled against each other.\'94}