{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15060\viewh19240\viewkind0
\deftab1134
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab1134\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs34 \cf0 121 A Smoker and a Non-Smoker Dispute a Pipe\

\b0 \
<See also 82a for a longer version>\
\
1. Well, I\'92ll just tell a story about a smoker and a non-smoker in the old days, okay?\
\
2. To all of you.\
\
3. Once upon a time a person who was not a smoker saw somebody else\'92s beautiful pipe and coveted it \
    very much, wanting badly to get it for himself.\
\
4. This smoker was very happy with his pipe.\
\
5. Well, one day, since the non-smoker wanted to get that [so badly], he stole it and made off with it.\
\
6. Since he stole it, these two guys then went to court.\
\
7. These two people, the smoker and the non-smoker, went at each other in a great court case.\
\
8. When they arrived at the official place [1] for their trial, they had to litigate [2] for a very long time, \
    those guys.\
\
9. It could not be done for them quickly.\
\
10. When they got there the smoker had been very angry, since he treasured his possession so much.\
\
11. The non-smoker wanted it badly, since the pipe was so beautiful, so he stole it.\
\
12. So then having discussed it vigorously, and argued and argued with each other, when they got to the \
      great courtroom, the officials [3] thought it over and instructed them thus: \'93If you are the smoker, \
      crumple up 
\f1 [4]
\f0  the [right amount of] tobacco,\'94 they said.\
\
13. So they made the pipe-thief crumple tobacco, and also made the smoker crumple tobacco, both of them.\
\
14. As for the non-smoker, the tobacco that he took and stuffed into the pipe was way too much!\
\
15. It just wouldn\'92t fit into the pipe when he tried to pack it in [5].\
\
16. As for the smoker, he only stuffed a small amount into the pipe, so it fit properly.\
\
17. So that non-smoker who desired somebody else\'92s possession and stole it did not win.\
\
18. He committed a grievous offense [6], not even being a smoker himself, yet still desiring \
      another\'92s possession and stealing it.\
\
19. When he was forced to stuff in tobacco, it was way too much, while the smoker put in exactly \
       enough [7], so the smoker was able to get his pipe back.\
\

\b Footnotes:\

\b0 \
[1] 
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u772 
\f0  k
\f2 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 : lit. \'93at the big place\'94.\
[2] t\'e1 p\'ee ve: The post-head versatile verb p\'ee here indicates that an action by a third person affects other \
     3rd persons.\
[3] kh\'fa t\'ea ph
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  : kh\'fa \'91chief; lord; bigshot\'92 < Tai (cf. Si 
\i khun
\i0 ).\
[4] ch
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f1 \uc0\u770 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : 'crumple up; wad into a ball'. DL:557.\
[5] d\'f4
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  m\'e2 d
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0  : lit. \'93pack not fit.\'94 d
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0  is a 
\i resultative complement 
\i0 specifying the successful or non-\
     successful completion of the act of packing in.\
[5] ph\'ee
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  \'91commit an offense\'92 < Tai (cf. Si 
\i ph\'ect
\i0 )\
[7] g\'e0-e: this word consists of the post-head versatile verb 
\b g\'e0
\b0  'V to a conclusion' plus the verb-particle \
     
\b e
\b0  'transitive motion', fused into a single syllable [
\b g\'e0y]
\b0 . See DL: 400-1.\
\
\
}