{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 AppleSymbols;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh13360\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 122/126? Playing Ball at New-Rice Festival; Spinning the Top at New Year's \

\b0 [playlet and conversation] \
Headman, Teacher, Paul, others\
[Tape XI, Side 1]\
1 C\'e0l\uc0\u596 \u770 : Well, Pastor, there's something I'd like to hear about. You say that the Lahu play ball
\fs18 \super 1
\fs24 \nosupersub  after they finish celebrating
\fs18 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub  the Rice-From-New-Paddy Festival
\fs18 \super 3
\fs24 \nosupersub ? How do you play? Can you explain it to me a little?\
2 T: Well, sure, I can explain it to you. When we've finished scarphing
\fs18 \super 4
\fs24 \nosupersub  the New-Rice feast, we hit the ball around. We (who call ourselves) Lahu do it every year, and we have a great time!
\fs18 \super 5
\fs24 \nosupersub  So today we'll get to play ball. \
3   : Who all will play?\
4 H: Oh, all the men in the village play. When it comes to ball-games, everybody wants to play. \
4a (inaudible)\
5 T: Let's go to it, then! Let's go! Hang up the net and let's go! \
6   : Can't the women play?\
7 T: Women aren't allowed to mix in and play along with the men. The men might get itchy hands
\fs18 \super 6
\fs24 \nosupersub !\
8 Boy: Ha, ha, ha.\
9 H: The women play among themselves
\fs18 \super 7
\fs24 \nosupersub  at a different time. They don't mix in with the men, the women.\
10 T: Would you like to mix it up then, you women?\
11 His wife: I'm game! \
(T laughs) \
12 C: How many people will be on a side?\
13 H: It's good if there are about eight or nine people on a side. The place where we play is wide.
\fs18 \super 8
\fs24 \nosupersub \
14 T: (pretending to misunderstand) Eight plus nine people
\fs18 \super 9
\fs24 \nosupersub --that's ridiculous,
\fs18 \super 10
\fs24 \nosupersub  what you're saying. There would be too many people on one side! \
15 H: Nine people 
\i all together
\i0 , nine all together! Can't you understand simple Lahu?10 When I said "eight or nine people," I meant nine people at most.
\fs18 \super 11
\fs24 \nosupersub \
16 T: In that case--\
17 Matisoff: Can I play too?\
18 T: Sure you can. The White Man
\fs18 \super 12
\fs24 \nosupersub  wants to play together [with us]. \
19 C: Let's play! Well, who's going to serve?
\fs18 \super 13
\fs24 \nosupersub \
20 H: Oh, \{sure it is to me / I'll take it\}! I'll take the ball! \
21    : O.K., here! \
22 H: \{Keep your eye on it now! / Pay attention now!\}
\fs18 \super 14
\fs24 \nosupersub  I'm going to hit it at you! Pap!\
(He imitates the sound of smacking the ball. Laughter.)\
It fell out of bounds, out of bounds! \
23 T: Keep quiet! Don't break in with your laughter, boys!
\fs18 \super 15
\fs24 \nosupersub \
24 C: What's the score now?
\fs18 \super 16
\fs24 \nosupersub \
25    : Oh boy, oh boy!\
26 H: This one still went out of bounds. A point [for them]. The ball has stopped.
\fs18 \super 17
\fs24 \nosupersub  Hey, again, you guys, hit it again! Oh, it fell out of bounds this time, too.\
27 C: How many points for your side now?\
28 H: My side has three points now. \
29 C: Three, eh? How many points do you need to win?
\fs18 \super 18
\fs24 \nosupersub \
30 H: Twenty-one.\
31 C: Twenty-one.\
32 T: If the other side doesn't get a single person--I mean, doesn't get a single 
\i point
\i0 , we only play up to twelve.
\fs18 \super 19
\fs24 \nosupersub \
33 H: Right, they haven't scored yet. We're going to get our eleven points. Give it a good whack! \
34    : You're wrong! It's only eleven [points that you need for a shutout]. \
35    : We only play up to eleven [if the other team hasn't scored]. \
36 C: Now what's the score?\
37 H: We've got nine points now.\
38 C: Nine points, eh?\
39 H: Mm-hm.\
(Some time has presumably elapsed)\
40 T: My side has 15 points already!
\fs18 \super 20
\fs24 \nosupersub \
41 C: Yeah, you've almost won now! \
42 H: \{They're touching their upper limit then
\fs18 \super 21
\fs24 \nosupersub ! / They're near the top then!\} But my side is too, remember. \
43 T: In a minute you'll know.
\fs18 \super 22
\fs24 \nosupersub  Hurry up and play, come on! Just serve it in here!\
44 H: I'll sock it to you! Tat! \
(He imitates the sound of hitting the ball. Laughter.)\
45 T: You guys, push it into the middle [of their court]! Into the middle. \
46 H: Hit it in, right into the middle. \
47 T: Don't push it away off to one side or the other.\
48 H: Just hit it right into the middle.\
49 C: What's the score now? Isn't it about twenty by this time?\
50 H: Nineteen for my side. And we're going on tuh-wenty
\fs18 \super 23
\fs24 \nosupersub !\
51 T: Eighteen for us.\
52 C: Well, there's only one point to go now.\
53 T: You serve, C--you serve.\
54 C: O.K., I'll serve.\
55 H: Hit it! \
56 C: There it goes.
\fs18 \super 24
\fs24 \nosupersub \
57 T: Hm, it landed way over on that side! \
58 H: Twenty-then twenty-one. We've almost won. Jut one point [more]. \
59 C: They've almost won.\
60 H: I'll rap it right back at you! I'll rap it right back!\
61 T: This time let Maw (hit it back / return the serve\}--Maw
\fs18 \super 25
\fs24 \nosupersub !\
62 H: I'm hitting it now. Just listen to this! \
(sound-effect)\
63 T: Oh, it came right past C's side
\fs18 \super 26
\fs24 \nosupersub !\
64 H: Well, you couldn't handle it, you guys. Probably because you haven't played in a long time, right?\
65 C: Yeah.\
66 H: Because you're awfully heavy-handed.
\fs18 \super 27
\fs24 \nosupersub \
67 T: Thu-shwe, what the hell were you doing anyway! I told you to hit it back / get (the ball)\}, and you go and take it easy
\fs18 \super 28
\fs24 \nosupersub  like that--it's really
\fs18 \super 29
\fs24 \nosupersub  disgusting. \
68 C: Well, I guess they've won this time, those guys.\
69 H: We've won now--we win! \
70 C: All right, let's switch sides and play again.
\fs18 \super 30
\fs24 \nosupersub \
71a H: We'll switch sides.\
71b C: We'll switch sides.\
72 H: Hm. The sun is awfully hot for us on this side. We want to be on the other side. The sun's really in our eyes.
\fs18 \super 31
\fs24 \nosupersub \
73 T: (presumably having gone over to the sunny side) It does dazzle your eyes, doesn't it?\
74 H: Yeah, it's really blinding. And the sun is awfully hot.\
75 C: Okay, we're all through playing now, right?\
76 H: We're all through playing. \
[A pause]\
77 H: Well, I'm going to give all of you ball-players a prize! If you were on the winning side you'll get something [a little] more valuable.
\fs18 \super 32
\fs24 \nosupersub  I've bought you a ace that's worth fifty baht, and I'm going to give it to you. The winners get two-thirds, and the losers get to eat one-third of it. So divide it up and get it! Get together here
\fs18 \super 33
\fs24 \nosupersub --/It's all put down here for you./ /Put down all your pieces together so we can be fair about dividing it up./\
78 P: This is fun, isn't it?\
79 H: Yeah.\
80 T: Well, I'm not eating anymore. 'Cause I didn't win.\
81 H: Haha, we're eating away, having a great time. You guys are no good [at the game].
\fs18 \super 34
\fs24 \nosupersub \
82 T: Stuff yourself,
\fs18 \super 35
\fs24 \nosupersub  stuff yourself, eat yours fill all by yourself!\
83 P: You say you'll play again next year, right?\
84 H: How much money are you going to put out next year then
\fs18 \super 36
\fs24 \nosupersub ?\
85 T: As much as a hundred and fifty.\
86 H: I [put up] fifty baht this year. How many of you people will be sharing
\fs18 \super 37
\fs24 \nosupersub  [in the prize], on your side?\
87 T: Eight or nine.\
88 H: Eight or nine people, eh. On my side there aren't too many people, you see. There are only six. Well, so this 150 that you're \{contributing / putting in\}, will you give all of it to the winners?\
89 T: Yup. I'll give (them) the whole thing.\
90 H: I bet you'll get mad! Suppose you don't win, [after putting up] such an amount!
\fs18 \super 38
\fs24 \nosupersub \
91 T: What do you care if I'm mad! It's no skin off your nose if I'm mad, you know.
\fs18 \super 39
\fs24 \nosupersub \
92 H: You'll be very upset if you lose.\
93 T: Even if I'm upset, I'll keep it inside myself. You people wont' suffer for it.\
94 H: O.K., go ahead, then, go ahead! We'll beat you. When we played that time last year, didn't you lose fifty baht? A child--\
95 T: It was more like five baht, I'd say.\
96 H: You couldn't even beat the boys, the children
\fs18 \super 40
\fs24 \nosupersub ! Even though you were all grown men. No skill, that's all.
\fs18 \super 41
\fs24 \nosupersub \
97    : Oh, you 'grown men' are no good for anything. If you want to play again, just go right ahead. Bet as much as you like
\fs18 \super 42
\fs24 \nosupersub ! \
98 T: Unless it's at least a hundred
\fs18 \super 43
\fs24 \nosupersub  I wouldn't want to do it at all.\
99 H: Who are all the best people that you've got? Hurry up and go bring them [here]!\
100 T: There isn't a single one of my people--on my side--who isn't good. Every last one of them is fine! \
101    : (laughing) Does that include the two white men
\fs18 \super 44
\fs24 \nosupersub ?\
102 T: I'll still have the white men on my side.\
103 H: On my side I've got a Northern Thai too! This Thai guy is very strong. \
104    : What's his name?\
105 H: The Thai on my team?\
105A  : Yeah.\
106 H: The Thai on my team is called Ai-Shwe--Ai-Shwe. He's really good, I tell you.\
107    : Where did you say he lives?\
108 H: Wh--I hear he lives at P\'e0-ta-n\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 .
\fs18 \super 45
\fs24 \nosupersub \
[laughter]\
He's coming over to us for a visit.\
109 P: What does this "P\'e0-ta-n\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 " mean?\
110 H: "P\'e0-ta-n\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 " means, in Northern Thai--\
111 T: What he means is the place down there called "P\'e0-ta-l\'e2-p\uc0\u601 \u660 "!\
112 H: "n\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 ," I tell you! It's not a "mouthful of tea"!
\fs18 \super 46
\fs24 \nosupersub \
113 P: Did you say "l\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 "?\
114 H: "n\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 , n\'e0-p\u601 \u770 \u660 "! "p\'e0-ta-n\'e0-p\u601 \u770 \u660 "!\
115 T: What's the meaning of this "p\'e0-ta-n\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 " then?\
116 H: When these folks
\fs18 \super 47
\fs24 \nosupersub  down there say "n\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660 " in their language "n\'e0-p\u601 \u770 \u660 " that is, it might possibly mean "a waterfall, a cascade"
\fs18 \super 48
\fs24 \nosupersub  in Lahu. That's probably true, that's what they mean by it.\
117    : It might mean "the path you go on to fetch water."\
118 H: What?\
119    : I said "the path you go on to fetch water."\
120 H: I don't know at this point. Since it's a foreign language we don't know the meanings properly.\
121 T: That's not the way you say "to fetch water." In Northern Thai you say 
\i paj t\'e1k n\'e1am
\i0 .
\fs18 \super 49
\fs24 \nosupersub \
122 H: They say "paj-t\'e1\uc0\u660 -na-p\u601 \u770 \u660 ." It means "go fetch water." It means "go to carry water (back)," I tell you! It means "go carry water." That's true! \
[having run this into the ground]\
123 P: So he's a pretty good ball-player, this Thai of yours?\
124 H: He's great. He says he's had practice.
\fs18 \super 50
\fs24 \nosupersub  He's managed to get schooling in all sorts of places in the city.\
125 T: What rank
\fs18 \super 51
\fs24 \nosupersub  did he get [in school] then?\
126 H: Well, in Lahu we have no way of saying what his rank was. In white-man's language he was "Number Two." \
127 T: "Number Two" isn't so wonderful! What's good is "Number One."\
128 H: "Number Two" is still pretty damn good.\
129 T: On our side we have them. On our side everybody's got a "Number One"!\
130 H: Well, you didn't win! 
\i We
\i0  were "Number One" today. \
131 T: Because our people were a little off their form, you see.
\fs18 \super 52
\fs24 \nosupersub \
132 H: Ha! You're Number One, and we're Number Two!
\fs18 \super 53
\fs24 \nosupersub \
133 T: We had a white-man on our side.
\fs18 \super 54
\fs24 \nosupersub \
134 H: Even your Number One white-man couldn't beat us Number Two people today. You're Number One and we get Number Two. No I mean 
\i we
\i0  get Number One and 
\i you
\i0  get Number Two.
\fs18 \super 55
\fs24 \nosupersub \
135 T: We won't know until next year.
\fs18 \super 56
\fs24 \nosupersub  We won't know till next year.\
136    : My side even the Big Boss
\fs18 \super 57
\fs24 \nosupersub --\
137 P: How many times a year do you have this ball-playing of yours?\
138 T: Well, this ball-playing goes on every evening, if there are people around.
\fs18 \super 58
\fs24 \nosupersub \
140 H: If there only are people around, we play every day.\
141 T: When we play every evening we don't make bets on it.
\fs18 \super 59
\fs24 \nosupersub  But when we play on a day like today, as we're celebrating our Rice-From-New-Paddy Festival, then we also match some money against each other.\
142 H: Well, the best ones at this ball-playing are the white men, aren't they? The white men are very good at it.\
143 P: Haven't you ever played football
\fs18 \super 60
\fs24 \nosupersub  then?\
144 H: Kicking, you know--since there aren't any flat places up here in the mountains, we can't do any kicking. But as far as kicking [itself] goes, if we had a place to kick, we could kick all right. Even the Lahu have done some kicking in their time.
\fs18 \super 61
\fs24 \nosupersub \
145 T: Yes, indeed! If we had a flat place, we'd love to \{kick a ball around / play football\}, the white men on one side and the Lahu on the other! \
146 H: We'd never beat the white men.\
147    : We'd win, we'd win! \
148 H: The white men are awfully good. They're very clever.\
149 T: Once in a while--\
150 H: We Lahu aren't very clever.\
151 P: Is this
\fs18 \super 62
\fs24 \nosupersub  really a traditional Lahu game that we've been talking about?\
152 T: Well, if you must bring up the tradition question,
\fs18 \super 63
\fs24 \nosupersub  it's really a white man's custom.\
153 P: What about really traditional Lahu games, what sort of things are there?\
154 T: Well--\
155 P: Is it just spinning the top
\fs18 \super 64
\fs24 \nosupersub  [that you can call your own sport]?\
156 T: We certainly do spin the top, we Lahu--\
157 P: You say that this top-spinning is a genuine Lahu thing, eh.\
158 T: It's the real thing.\
159 P: Is it the only kind [of sport that is really Lahu]?\
160 T: Yes, spinning the top.\
161 P: When do you play it, this top-game?\
162 T: You mean spinning the top?\
163 H: When we celebrate New Year's.\
164 T: At New Year's.\
165    : At Christmas
\fs18 \super 65
\fs24 \nosupersub  too, I'll bet. \
166 T: We play both at New Year's and at Christmas.
\fs18 \super 66
\fs24 \nosupersub \
167 P: How many days do you do it?\
168 T: Well, we play it for about a week, see
\fs18 \super 67
\fs24 \nosupersub ?\
169 P: Can you tell me a little bit about this top-spinning? How do you go about it?\
170 T: Oh, I can certainly tell you [all] about spinning tops, my friend.
\fs18 \super 67
\fs24 \nosupersub \
171 P: How do you win at it, how do you play it?
\fs18 \super 68
\fs24 \nosupersub \
172 T: This top-spinning is done \{in pairs / two people at a time\}.\
173 H: You pair off
\fs18 \super 69
\fs24 \nosupersub  and set it spinning!\
174 T: Let's say you and I, the two of us, are paired and we play. When you set it spinning
\fs18 \super 70
\fs24 \nosupersub , I have a go at it [with my own top]. Everybody gets divided up,
\fs18 \super 71
\fs24 \nosupersub  into one side or the other.\
175 H: You take a good piece of string,
\fs18 \super 72
\fs24 \nosupersub  and onto the butt-end of the top--er--you tie it firmly to a stick, then you wind it carefully around your
\fs18 \super 73
\fs24 \nosupersub  top and send it spinning off,
\fs18 \super 74
\fs24 \nosupersub  then when you've got it whirling away round and round, [the other player] hurls [this top] against it.
\fs18 \super 75
\fs24 \nosupersub \
176 P: But what's that you said about "pairing off
\fs18 \super 76
\fs24 \nosupersub "?\
177 T: "A pair" means "you and me, the two of us"!\
178 H: (simultaneously with 177) You and I make "a pair." When you set it up, I strike at it.
\fs18 \super 77
\fs24 \nosupersub \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 179 H: Let's say ten people on the other side have had their turn
\fs18 \super 78
\fs24 \nosupersub  striking, and then [it's your turn to] set one up. You set it up, and one of their fellows strikes at it--that's how it's done. *When there are many people on one side, they can't [all] strike out [at once]. There's no time for them to each have a turn one after the other. But two people could strike [at the same time]. Even three people could strike [at the same time].
\fs18 \super 79 
\fs24 \nosupersub (*t\'ea p\'e1 ve ch\uc0\u596  c\u596 \u768  m\'e2 qo m\'e2 d\u596 \u770 \u660  ph\u603 \u768 \u660  ve. n\'ee \u103 \u776 \'e2 k\'e0\u660  d\u596 \u770 \u660  ph\u603 \u768 \u660  ve)\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 180 P: Suppose you strike at it but don't hit it--\
181 H: If you don't hit it you lose.\
182 T: You just lose!\
183 H: When you strike and do hit it, then the other fellow's [top] goes jumping away--ahh
\fs18 \super 80
\fs24 \nosupersub !--it jumps, jumps, jumps, jumps away! \
183a  : Is it like--[the rest of the sentence is unintelligible]--?\
184    : It jumps off every which way.
\fs18 \super 81
\fs24 \nosupersub  I'll burn in a hot strike at yours!
\fs18 \super 82 
\fs24 \nosupersub \
185 Matisoff: Do only children play?\
186 H: Grown-ups play too.\
187 T: Children also play.\
188 H: Everybody who's good at it plays.\
189 P: The losers have to do the setting-up, right
\fs18 \super 83
\fs24 \nosupersub ?\
190 H: Once they're forced to be setters-up, they'll do the setting up forever. Even if [the game lasts] the whole day long, the losers have got to [keep] setting 'em up. While the winners keep on winding up [the string around their tops] and [firing off strikes with all their might. They play until they're ready to drop from hunger.
\fs18 \super 84
\fs24 \nosupersub \
191 T: White men probably don't play with tops, I daresay. \
192 Matisoff: No, they don't.\
193 P: They probably don't. Only the children play around with them.\
194 T: I see.\
195 H: It's not that way with the Lahu.
\fs18 \super 85
\fs24 \nosupersub  Even the adults play with all their might. As long as there's a little light--almost the whole day long we play as hard as we can. In joy and gladness, until we're soaked with sweat, we Lahu have a great time at it.\
196 T: Our foreheads get red as fire!
\fs18 \super 86
\fs24 \nosupersub \
197 H: And the sweat comes dripping off us!
\fs18 \super 87
\fs24 \nosupersub  The sweat pours off us! \
198 P: Where is it that you people play the top game?\
199 H: In a flat place like over there--\
200 T: We play in a flat place, like over there, in a flat place.\
201 H: We choose up sides properly, and carefully draw the boundary-line, then you can only stay below that line! You mustn't step over it, or climb above it\'85. [LAST SENTENCE UNINTELLIGIBLE]\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 1. b\uc0\u596 \u769 -\'9a\ul i\ulnone  d\uc0\u596 \u770 \u660  ve: lit. "hit a ball" 
\f1 \uc0\u42890 
\f0  play ball. First syllable of b\uc0\u596 \u769 -\'9a\ul i\ulnone  < Eng. 'ball.' The game in question is a kind of volleyball, played on a small patch of relatively level land in the middle of the village. \
2. c\'e2: lit. 'eating.' The festival is marked by a feast, and constitutes one of the few days in the year that the Huey Tad villages get meat to eat. \
3. C\'e0-\'9a\uc0\u616 \u769 -\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone . "Paddy-new-cooked rice": a harvest celebration in October, still observed by the Christian Lahu in a secularized form, and apparently of great antiquity. \
4. g\'ea is a vivid pro-verb (cf. v\'e2), here used for c\'e2 'eat.' The literal meaning is 'pierce, stick.' \
5. <ha-l\uc0\u603 \u768 -ha-qa> te ve: "do it in joy and gladness."\
6. I.e., they might become sexually aroused.\
7. N\sub x\nosupersub  qh\'e2 N\sub x\nosupersub  = 'all by N-self.' See 
\i grammar
\i0 , _____. \
8. "As for hitting the ball, the place is wide."\
9. I.e., seventeen on one side. \
10. Lit: "it is not human speech."\
11. The pretended misunderstanding rests on the fact that numerical approximation can be expansed in Lahu by Numeral X + clf + l\uc0\u603  
\f2 + 
\f0 Numeral X+1 + clf, using the particle l\uc0\u603  'and,' where logically 'or' is meant. \
12. K\'e2l\'e2phu: lit. "white Indian." All non-Orientals used to be called K\'e2l\'e2 'Indians' by the Lahu. When they just encountered Europeans, therefore these were characterized as 'white K\'e2l\'e2.' An American Negro anthropologist working among the Lahu during the same period I did received the appellation K\'e2l\'e2-n\'e2\uc0\u660  'black K\'e2l\'e2.' Color designations for foreigners is very much in keeping with the naming practices observed by their Southeast Asian tribes in describing subgroups of their own people--cf. Black, Red, Yellow Lahu; Blue, White Meo, etc. Throughout my stay in Thailand, I was called K\'e2l\'e2-phu, and nothing else, despite my attempts to have them use my first name, Yak\'f4\u660  'James.'\
13. "who will hit it?"\
14. "keep looking at it well!"\
15. This remark is addressed to the audience in the house where the playlet is being enacted. \
16. "How many has it reached already?"\
17. "It has died." I.e., it has come to rest. This is a cause for satisfaction, since the ground slopes sharply down from the 'playing field' on all sides, and any out-of-bounds ball is likely to roll a considerable distance before coming to rest against some obstacle. \
18. "when you get how many points do you win?"\
19. The Pastor asserts that 12-0 is a shutout. He is contradicted implicitly by the Headman in Speech 33, and explicitly in 34 and 35. \
20. The P\sub v\nosupersub  \'9a\uc0\u596  'still' is here used to emphasize that the fifteen points are something to be reckoned with. \
21. \uc0\u596 \u768 -na qh\u596 \u769  th\u596 \u770  ve y\'f2 n\'e8: hapax legomenon. CHECK. cf. qh\u596 \u769 -qh\u596  q\'f2\u660  ve 'to return home' (baby-talk) \
22. I.e., 'you'll soon see who will beat whom.'\
23. The headman jocularly lapses into Shan with the words p\uc0\u601 \u770  \'9a\'e2o 'and twenty.'\
24. "I've hit it already."\
25. It is not clear whether Maw is a player on T's own team or on H's team. T. could be admonishing a player on his own side to return the next serve or could be requesting that somebody other than H. serve. CHECK. M\uc0\u596 \u769  means 'teacher' in Shan or Thai, and could be somebody's nickname. (Maybe Th\'fb-\'9aw\'e8's. See #67)\
26. c\'e0l\'f4 phi k\ul a\ulnone  l\'f2\uc0\u660  e ve: ka 'space between.' cf. ph\'e2-k\'fb 'side (of body).' Paul interpreted this as c\'e0l\u596 \u770  
\i p\'e2 k\'e0\uc0\u660 
\i0  l\'f2\uc0\u660  e ve "it came in near C\'e0l\u596 \u770 ," but I now believe this to be wrong. CHECK.\
27. l\'e0\uc0\u660 -\'9a\u603  h\u603  j\'e2: i.e., 'clumsy.'\
28. ca m\uc0\u616  ch\u603 \u770 :  lit. "go around sitting."\
29. c\'e2\uc0\u660  m\u616 \u768  ch\u616  \'9a\u616  \u603 \u768 : "disgusting up to here."\
30. I.e., 'let's switch the teams around to the apposite sides of the net.' Lit: "let's exchange playing-places this time (q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 )." \
31. m\uc0\u603 \u770 \u660  kh\u603 \u770  ve 'to have one's eyes dazzled.'\
32. Lit. "whoever is the winning side, the value of it [the prize] will be a [little] more to get." a-c\'ed is an adverb meaning 'a little,' but it has acquired the function of forming the 'comparative degree' of adjectives, and in this usage does not necessarily mean 'a little--er,' but sometimes only '--er.' \
33. c\'f2 t\'ea g\uc0\u603  t\u603  a l\u603 : t\'ea g\u603  t\u603  ve 'assemble, gather oneself' CHECK ("put together")\
34. qh\'e2 ve 'be good (At something).'\
35. v\'e2 k\uc0\u601 : vigorous pro-verb v\'e2, here used for 'eat,' plus juxtacapital V\sub v\nosupersub  k\uc0\u601  'into'--'pack it away, stuff oneself.'\
36. I.e., for prize-money. \
37. Lit: "how many people will get (something)?"\
38. \'e0-m\'f9 is a sentence adverb expressing a possible future unpleasantness, like English 'lest.' See 
\i grammar
\i0 , _____.\
39. Lit: "even if I'm angry, it does not harm you."\
40. y\'e2-n\uc0\u603 \u768  'young man from puberty to marriage'; y\'e2-\u603 \u769  'child, baby.'\
41. th\uc0\u596  ve ' be skillful.'\
42. "however much you bet, bet!"\
43. Lit: "if it is not beginning-with-a-hundred-climbing-up-higher."\
44. The author's 
\b __?__
\b0  at volleyball was less than legendary in the village.\
45. A made-up name that sounds rather like a real place in the vicinity. See below.\
46. l\'e0-p\uc0\u601 \u770 \u660  (first syllable in low-falling tone) means 'tea-mouthful.'\
47. m\'f4 \'9au y\'e2-y\uc0\u603 \u768  "these folks down there(?)." cf. the expression y\u603 \u768 -y\'e2-qa-y\'e2 'the children of the house; the younger generation.' CHECK.\
48. \'ed-k\'e2\uc0\u660  pu k\u616 \u768  and \'ed-k\'e2\u660  pi k\u616 \u768  are Lahu synonyms for 'waterfall.' Lit: "I do not now know whether it means\'85."\
49. See Haas' dictionary t\'e0k, p. 194.\
50. y\uc0\u596 \u770  \u103 \u776 a te j\u596  c\'ea: "he says he's had-the-experience-of (j\u596 ) getting-to (\u103 \u776 a) do it. \
51. nab\'e2\uc0\u660  < Bse < Eng 'number.'\
52. "because our people did not do it properly, you [see]."\
53. This is meant to be witheringly sarcastic. \
54. It is not clear whether this is meant to be an excuse for losing, or a claim of intrinsic superiority in spite of having lost. \
55. The Headman got confused with the foreign numerals wan and th\'fb. \
56. Lit: "if it's not next year, (we) don't know."\
57. \'9aa-th\'ea l\'f3: the rich Thai planter on whom the Huey Tan people used to depend for a living. See _____. Perhaps the speeches of 136 was about to say that the Big Boss' "smart money" favored his team. \
58. I.e., if the men are not off in the fields. Naturally ball-playing is impossible in the rainy season, when the village is a sea of mud. Lit: "as for hitting the ball, if we are here, every might we hit it." \
59. \uc0\u596 \u768 -ph\'fb y\'f9 ve "take a price," i.e., 'make a wager.'\
60. b\uc0\u596 \u769 -\'9a\ul i\ulnone  th\'ea\uc0\u660  ve 'kick a ball; play kickball, football, soccer.'\
61. The experiential P\sub v\nosupersub  j\uc0\u596  conveys "have \'85en in one's time."\
62. I.e., the version of volleyball they play.\
63. Lit, "as for the time when we must discuss customs."\
64. kh\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  d\u596 \u770 \u660  ve, lit: "beating the top."\
65. pw\uc0\u603 \u770  hal\u603 \u768  "happy festival." The missionaries' translation of 'Christmas.' \
66. Notice the Lahu way of expressing 'celebrate': New-Rice and New Year's are feasts, so the verb is c\'e2 'eat.' With Christmas the verb te 'do, perform' is used.\
67. Parenthetical n\uc0\u596 \u768  'you' is thrown in as a sort of rapport-cementer with one's interlocutor. Here it is translated 'see?,' and in 170 as 'my friend.'\
68. Lit: "who wins how, who hits how?"\
69. \uc0\u596 \u768 -c\u603  te ve "make pairs."\
70. kh\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  t\u603  ve: "set up a top," 'to fling a top off its string and set it spinning.' One's adversary then takes his own top and tries to fling it so that it hits the first one. If the two tops collide, the one which remains spinning longer wins. If the second player fails to hit the first top, he loses the round out of hand. \
71. p\uc0\u603 \u768  k\u601  "divide-insert": 'to make a division so that the divided entities are each included into a separate aggregate. \
72. Lit: 'nicely making a piece of string.' The te here and in the next clause seems to have the sense of y\'f9 'take.' CHECK.\
73. 'your' is inserted in the translation to avoid ambiguity with 'the top' = highest point.\
74. I.e., by a sharp swooping of the stick through a 360 degree arc, as the player's body makes a full turn. The top flies off the string and travels about 50 feet through the air before landing. \
75. te t\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  ve "to set in opposition with, to pit against." From t\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  (d\'e0\uc0\u660 ) ve 'to be facing (one another)' CHECK. t\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  and v\'e2 are in fortuitous concatenation. \
76. Paul was unfamiliar with the expression \uc0\u596 \u768 -c\u603  te ve.\
77. There are technical terms of the game: kh\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  te ve 'to set the first top spinning ("set up the top"),' kh\u596 \u768 \u660  d\u596 \u770 \u660  ve 'try to hit the first top with a second top' ("strike at the top")--this expression also has the more general meaning "to play the top game."). 'To be successful in hitting the first top' is expressed by kh\u596 \u768 \u660  h\u601 \u770 \u660  ve (see 180-182). \
78. 'had their turn' translates the \sub v\nosupersub V q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  'seriatim.' \
79. The meaning of this paragraph is somewhat obscure. CHECK. "at the same time" is not expressed in the Lahu, but seems essential to the sense. \
80. \uc0\u596 \u596 
\b ? 
\b0 - a cry of satisfaction.\
81. <\uc0\u596 \u768 -q\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  \uc0\u596 \u768 -l\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone >. The word \uc0\u596 \u768 -q\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone -l\ul \uc0\u596 \ulnone  means 'a crass' + , i.e., a figure whose lines go off in different directions. CHECK. \
82. The adverbial expression qha ch\'ee\uc0\u660  'as hot as possible' modifies the pro-verb v\'e2 (
\f1 \uc0\u42890 
\f0 d\uc0\u596 \u770 \u660  'strike at') + the V\sub v\nosupersub  k\uc0\u601  'V into.'\
83. Striking is a prerogative of those who have won previously. It's not as interesting to be hit as it is to hit someone else. \
84. qha j\uc0\u603 \u770 : j\u603 \u770  also means 'stop' as well as 'hungry,' so conceivably this sentence could mean 'they go on striking until they stop (for the day).' CHECK. Also could mean 'until it hurts.' j\u603 \u770  is the couplet partner both of m\u601 \u768 \u660  'be hungry' and n\'e0 'to hunt.' \
85. "As for Lahu, it is not so."\
86. "Our foreheads too we make red so they stay red" (t\ul a\ulnone  P\sub v\nosupersub  of permanent state). \
87. k\ul \uc0\u616 \ulnone -t\'e0 is apparently a kh\uc0\u596 \u770 -y\u616 \u768  for k\ul \uc0\u616 \u768 \ulnone  'sweat.' p\uc0\u596 -n\u603 \u768 \u660  is an emphatic adverb of some kind. \'9a\'e1 \u603 \u768  is an amply attested emphatic adverb. CHECK. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}