{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 AppleSymbols;\f4\fnil\fcharset128 HiraMinProN-W3;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14260\viewh20000\viewkind0
\deftab1134
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab1134\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs34 \cf0 131 Struggling to Survive with Lazy Husbands \
					-or-\
	Harvesting Rice, Catching Crabs, and Lazy Husbands\

\b0 \
1. My dea
\f1 r 
\f0 [1], when you went to spend the night in the fields this week, were you able to harvest a lot of rice?\
\
2. There was nothing I could get! Since I was carrying my whining baby around! [2]\
\
3. Grandma [3], how\'92s it going with you? Didn\'92t you get anything?\
\
4. I couldn\'92t get anything. Seeing as how I\'92m an old lady, this morning I couldn\'92t move very fast.\
\
     My knees hurt.\
\
5. Younger sister, what about you?\
\
6. As for me, I did get something. But I still don\'92t have enough to live on.  I don\'92t have any trees \
    [that have produced things to eat]. They\'92re not bearing fruit. The rats and birds have eaten them \
    all  up.\
\
7. So when will it [the rice harvesting] likely be finished?\
\
8. Well, it\'92s probably not finished yet, unfortunately! I guess it\'92ll still be about a week before it can \
     all be harvested. The starlings might well eat the paddy [in the meantime] too! As for [us] people, \
     if old folks try to go and do it, the harvesting will never get done.\
\
9. If we try to keep reaping for a week, will it be finished?\
\
10. It should probably be finished. [But even] when we\'92ve finished, there\'92ll still be nothing to live on.\
      After it [the reaping] is over I guess we\'92ll have to do the threshing.\
\
11. We\'92ll do the threshing.\
\
12. When the threshing\'92s done where will you all build your granary?\
\
13. I\'92ll probably just carry it [the rice] home to store. A little bit each day.\
\
14. Younger sister, have you built [a granary] in the fields?\
\
15. I guess I\'92ll have to thresh and store [the rice] in the fields. Since there's [only] my son [to help].\
\
16. There's nobody to do the carrying then?\
\
17. I\'92ve got nobody to do the carrying. There are only the two of us.\
\
18. Well in that case I can\'92t imagine [4] how to go and carry it to store. [5] It\'92s so tiring.\
\
19. For my part, I can manage to do the carrying. Even though I only have two people. The reason \
      why we can carry it is because we didn\'92t get very much.\
\
20. About how many hundred basketsful [6] are you likely to get?\
\
21. I suppose about one hundred basketsful. I don\'92t see how it\'92ll be large enough for us to live on.\
      I don\'92t know what went wrong this year [7]. When we pile up the paddy we can\'92t even \
      make [proper] rice-stoops [8] out of it. They're just like sitting dogs. [9]\
\
22. How many heaps will you get?\
\
23. Probably only three or four. Little teeny ones.\
\
24. In that case it should be enough to live on.\
\
25. I doubt it would be enough. We\'92ll probably have to go buy [some] in order to eat.\
\
26. So then next year what will you probably do?\
\
27. Next year I\'92ll just have to borrow and borrow [10]. From our friends and neighbors.\
\
28. Grandma, where would you go to buy [rice] to live on?\
\
29. Dear me, I suppose I\'92d just go buy it from the Northern Thai [11].\
\
30. Instead of [going] to the Northern Thai, one probably couldn\'92t go to share with Lahu friends. Since nobody at all got [enough] rice.\
\
31. Well, next year we\'92ll probably starve to death, eh? We don\'92t have any money [12] either.\
\
32. If we could only raise pigs and chickens and sell them [to the Thai] to buy food.\
\
33. I\'92m just so damn tired of living this way! [13]\
\
34. There\'92s nothing we can do about it!\
\
35. Because [we\'92re] not very good at working in the fields, since we\'92re all so old.\
\
<Pause>\
\
36. C\'e0-h
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0  [14]: Na-th\'ee, why don't you say [15] that the work is so hard [in the fields] that you\'92re hungry for food to go with the rice [16], and tell your husband to go hunting for animals to eat.\
\
37. What kind of food have you gotten to eat with your rice this week, my dear?\
\
38. We didn\'92t get to eat anything at all, because we\'92ve been working so hard [17]. Even if I say to my old man [18] \'93Go hunt for something to eat,\'94 he doesn\'92t go.\
\
39. Don\'92t you even get to eat monkey-meat or anything? [19]\
\
40. I tell you we don\'92t even get to eat monkey-meat either!\
\
41. And what kind of food have you been eating?\
\
42. Today I hiked [20] down there to the stream where the chickens feed [21] so I could scoop up \
       some crabs!\
\
42b. I got a turtle to eat.\
\
<squeal of laughter>\
\
43. (C\'e0-h
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 ): Tell C\'e0-m
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0 \'92s father [22] to go over to Hw
\f1 e
\f0 \uc0\u768 -t
\f1 \'fb
\f0  next week to hunt wild boar and spend the night there!\
\
44. I don\'92t know whether he\'92d go or not. The father of my C\'e0-m
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0  is a real lazybones.\
	\
45. Just tell him \'93If you don\'92t go we won\'92t have anything to eat!' Just tell him \'93Hurry up and go, we\'92re starving! We can\'92t hold out anymore!\'94\
\
46. He just won\'92t go [do it] for you. He\'92s lazy like the father of my own children. [23] He just wants to stay at home, that guy.\
\
47. You ought to beat him up! That\'92s the way to treat old farts.\
\
48. Tell him the kids are hungry for meat.\
\
49. You tell me to hit him, but he\'92s stronger than me [24]! And I can\'92t go and divorce him either.\
\
50. An old geezer like that you\'92ve got to drive [into action] by beating him up! The type who doesn\'92t take care of somebody like you.\
\
51. I don\'92t know what to do. I\'92m so miserable! [25].\
\
52. Since you married him, you\'92re stuck with him [26]!\
\
53. One problem is, he doesn\'92t want to separate. The other problem is, I can\'92t divorce him.\
\
54. Getting divorced is not according to God\'92s will. Since you\'92ve already gone and married him. Ever since you were very young.\
\
55. You\'92ve put your finger on the problem!\
\
56. We\'92ve just got to accept it. There\'92s nothing to be done! Even if we don\'92t have anything to eat, we\'92ll just starve together.\
\
57. This week I don\'92t know what we\'92ll have to eat.\
\
58. <Jokingly> You\'92ll just have to kill a chicken in the morning [27].\
\
59. Kill one tonight while you\'92re at it! To eat tomorrow morning.\
\
60. As for me, I don\'92t have 
\i anything
\i0  to eat [28]. I don\'92t even have a chicken. When I go to dam [a stream] for fish, I don\'92t catch anything to eat. Since I have so many children. if I only catch one [fish]\
it likely wouldn't be enough to eat!\
\
61. I have a big male pig. I\'92ll slaughter it to feed you. Next week.\
\
62. Even if you kill it to feed us we don\'92t have anything to buy it with! We don\'92t have any money.\
\
63. I\'92ll give it to you on credit!\
\
64. I don\'92t see any way to get [money][29]. If I should get ahold of a baht, I have to buy food for my kids to eat, clothes for them to wear\'97\
\
65. [girl] Enough, enough already! <laughs>\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 :\
\
[1] n\'f2 (< PLB 
\b *nam
\b0  
\f3 \uc0\u10916  *
\f2\b \uc0\u660 
\f0 nam 
\b0 was originally a kinship term for close female relatives, but is now \
    usable as a friendly term of address to intimates of either sex. See DL:779.\
[2] y\'e2-p\'fb-y\'e2-\uc0\u331 
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 : '
\f0 carry around a whining child; be saddled with the care of many children'. A similar expression is y\'e2-c
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f0 \uc0\u769 -y\'e2-\u331 
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0 . See DL:428, 1255, 1257.\
[3] m
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -th
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 w: respectful term of address to an elderly woman (< Shan).\
[4] d
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  \'e2 t
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f0 : lit. \'93think-not-emerge\'94.\
[5] ca p\'fb k\uc0\u601 : a three-verb concatenation comprising ca 'go and', p\'fb 'carry', k\u601  'put in to store'.\
[6] t\'fb \ul (\ulnone Clf) < Shan tu\uc0\u331 . See DL:613.\
[7] Lit. \'93I don\'92t know how it went [this year] like this.\'94\
[8] c\'e0-p
\f1 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0 : a pile of harvested paddy. See DL 445.\
[9] I.e., the paddy just makes miserable little heaps the size of sitting dogs.\
[10] ca-ch\'ee-ca-\uc0\u331 
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  (ElabV): when used alone, 
\b ch\'ee
\b0  means \'91borrow something that is to be repaid by \
     an equivalent\'92 (like money or food), whereas 
\b \uc0\u331 
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  
\b0 means \'91borrow something that is to be returned \
     as such\'92 (like a tool); but in this elaborate expession the two verbs (here translated as \'91borrow \
     and borrow\'92) merely reinforce each other.\
[11] K
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0 l
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0  g
\f2 \uc0\u603 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f0 : lit. \'93where the Northern Thai are; in the N. Thai area\'94; Cf. \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u616 
\f0  \'91region; area\'92 \
      (DL: 1228). It  now appears that 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u616  
\f0 is best considered to be a unitary locative noun-particle  \
       meaning 'at a place (where)'. This was not recognized in either GL or DL.\
[12] The speaker uses the Thai-derived word 
\b \'9aat\'e2(n)
\b0  for \'91money\'92 rather than the native Lahu \
      
\b phu
\b0 , evidently because the villagers\'92 contact with a money-based economy was mostly restricted\
       to their dealings with the Northern Thai.\
[13] This sentence ends with a string of four exclamatory Puf\'92s (y\'e2 o n
\f1 \uc0\u101 \u772 
\f0  l\'ea) which follow \
       a concatenation of three verbs (ph
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  \'91exist\'92, b
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  \'91be tired of\'92, c\'e0
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0  \'91very\'92)\
[14] A man sitting nearby prompts them.\
[15] 'Why don't you' translates the interrogative vocative noun-particle 
\b \'e0
\b0 .\
[16] 
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u772 
\f0 -ch\'ee, lit. \'93rice lifter\'94: food that is eaten with one\'92s rice (cf. Thai 
\b kh\'e2aw
\b0  \'91rice\'92, 
\b k\'e0p-kh\'e2aw
\b0 , \
       lit. \'93with rice, rice go-with.\'94 Sometimes translated as 'curry', but here more generally as 'food'.\
[17] I.e., since the work in the rice fields is so demanding, there\'92s no time for any other kind of \
       female subsistence activities like cultivating vegetable gardens.\
[18] 
\b l
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 -p
\f1 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0\b0 , ult. < Chinese 
\f4 \'98\'56\'95\'76
\f0  (Mand. l\uc0\u259 of
\f1 \uc0\u117 \u772 
\f0 ). See DL:1400.\
[19] m
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -m
\f1 \'fb
\f0 -m
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 : 'monkey meat or something'. m
\f1 \'fb
\f0  is a bound morpheme that occurs in\
      elaborate expressions, sometimes conveying an indefinite meaning like English 'or anything'. \
       See DL: 1003-4 where other nuances of meaning are listed.\
[20] kh\uc0\u601 \u768  \'91march; hike\'92 (probably from Yunnanese Chinese) is brisker in meaning than the usual \
       word 
\b qay
\b0  \'91go\'92.\
[21] 
\f1 \uc0\u103 \u776 \'e2
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -pa t
\f1 \'ea
\f0  l
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 : apparently this was a place where jungle-chickens roamed to feed.  
\b CHECK\

\b0 [22] I.e., the husband of the woman he\'92s talking to, who is the mother of C\'e0-m
\f2 \uc0\u596 
\f0 \uc0\u768 
\f2 \uc0\u660 
\f0 . Referring to people \
       as the parent of their child (a practice anthropologists call 
\i teknonymy
\i0 ) is widespread in SE Asia.\
[23] I.e., 'my own husband'.\
[24] Lit., \'93I can\'92t win [against] him.\'94\
[25] ph
\f2 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  b
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0  j\'e2: lit. \'93very tired of living\'94\
[26] Lit. \'93You can\'92t separate anymore.\'94 Cf. t\'e0 \'91want to separate (as an unhappy spouse)\'92, DL:594-5.\
[27] This is a wry bit of humor. If she had a chicken there would be no problem.\
[28] The speaker pronounces the verb 
\b c
\f2 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0\i , 
\i0\b0 \'91have; be there\'92 with exaggerated drawling intonation.\
[29] To repay the owner of the pig.}