{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww28820\viewh19240\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 137 Man\'92s Primeval Gourd Goes Missing, and God Looks For It\
\
1. Once upon a time, when God created a [the first] human being, He created him to stay inside a gourd [1], it is said.\
\
2. One day a bat lit off a 
\i tawkaw
\i0 -fruit[2] so it fell right down, and since there was a barking-deer dozing under the 
\i tawkaw
\i0 -tree, it fell crashing down on him, and because he was startled he suddenly jumped up and ran away into an old field. [3]\
\
3. A jungle-chicken also flew over, and \{alit/alighted\} on a cassia shrub [4]\
\
4. At that time a horse was also \{eating grass/grazing\} under the cassia.\
\
5. That horse got very scared, so he ran away, and it \{came to/ entered\} the ears of an elephant.\
\
6. Since the elephant was also very frightened, when he \{was running/ran\} away full tilt [5] he happened to step on the gourd and made it roll [6] [away down a slope].\
\
7. One day when God came to visit the human, he couldn\'92t find him, so he summoned all the animals and all the Trees, and asked them [where the human was].\
\
8. Then when God asked the pine tree, the pine tree said \'93I didn\'92t see.\'94\
\
9. God said, \'93When the human gets out [of the gourd], may he chop you down!\'94\
\
10. And do not ever again \{put out/sprout\} sprouts [7]!\'94 \'96 because God said that, to this very day the pine tree puts out no sprouts.\
\
11. Then when he went on to question the butterfly, since the butterfly also said \'93I didn\'92t see,\'94 God said, \'93And as for you, every day, rain or shine, you will have to go look for food\'94 \'96 and since He said that, every day [butterflies] have to look for their food.\
\
12. Then he went on to ask the 
\i peh-men
\i0 [8] bug, and the 
\i peh-men
\i0  bug said, \'93I saw it go down into the water down there, so since he told Him this God said, \'93May your kind always have \{juice/liquid\}!\'94 \'96 and because God blessed him thus, to this very day, his species produces a liquid.\
\
13. Then God called all the animals together again, and made them [try to] take the gourd out from the water.\
\
14. All the animals, all the different kinds of animals then [tried to] take it out, but they could not.\
\
15. \{A kind of crab/a member of the species called crab\}[9] then \{took/grabbed\} it, and place it on the bank for Him.[10]\
\
16. Then God went on to say: \'93Whoever manages to take this human out of the gourd will get to sit and eat the first fruits of their labor in the fields!\'94 \'96 when he said this, the starling said, \'93I\'92ll get him out, if that\'92s the way it is,\'94 and when God said, \'93If you can do it, do it!,\'94 the starling said, \'93My beak is very long!\'94 and all day and all night he pecked [at it].\
\
17. But even though that beak of his got all worn down, it couldn\'92t pierce through.\
\
18. Then the rat said in his turn, \'93
\i I\'92ll
\i0  now get him out!\'94 and he then gnawed away and pierced through.\
\
19. When he pierced through, unfortunately[11] he slightly bit the human\'92s nose as he gnawed [12].\
\
20. Thus to this day, [we] have \{an indentation/ a dent\}[13] between our eyes.[14]\
\
Addendum (by C\'e0-l\'f4 and JAM) (NOT ON TAPE)\
\
21. Thus to this very day, rats live secretly with humans, and have permission to keep secretly eating people\'92s food and drink, people\'92s rice.\
\
Footnotes:\
[1] The Freudian analysis of this creation myth is obvious: gourd = womb\
[2] The 
\b t
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u769 
\f0 -k
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0\b0  i\'9a a kind of palm with very large leaves, bearing plentiful fruit.\
[3] 
\b h
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0\b0 : a swidden allowed to lie fallow and revert to jungle over several years\
[4] 
\b m\'ec-c
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0\b0 : cassia (a shrub with red flowers)\
[5] 
\f2\b \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2-th\'e8
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 \
[6] 
\f2\b \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a n\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -pu
\b0 : happen to (
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a) + step (
\b n\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 ) + roll (
\b pu
\b0 )\
     vV V    V\
[7] 
\f1\b \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -c
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  c
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  ve
\b0 : lit. \'93sprout sprouts,\'94 a cognate object construction that does not translate well.\
[8] 
\b p
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u770 
\f0 -m
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f0 (n)-c\'e8
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 : a tiny bee-like insect, the size of a fly, that secretes a very sticky liquid that makes beeswax. Its bite does not hurt, and its larvae are edible. See DL:848\
[9] This very sentence, used as an example in DL 854, there receives a different translation, also possible out of context: \'93He took a kind of crab and put it on the bank for him.\'94\
[10] 
\b \'e1-c\'e8-gu t\'ea c\uc0\u601 \u768 \

\b0 [11] 
\b \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u101 \u772 
\f0\b0  particle expressing regret\
[12] 
\b g\uc0\u601 \u768 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -h
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0\b0 : \'91hit by gnawing\'92\
[13] 
\b ch\'e8
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -k\'fa-l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0\b0 \
[14] This was illustrated for me by a sketch [INSERT]}