{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww37900\viewh21360\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 158 Problems of Slash-and-Burn Agriculture\
\
Conversation among Paul Tcalo (C\'e0-l
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0 ) \'93P\'94, Th\'fb-y\'ec (T-y), Pastor C\'e0-bo (T for \'93teacher\'94)\
	R\'e9pliques 1-48; 49-78 \'93The Lahu Agricultural Cycle\'94\
1. P: Well, this group of Lahu of yours living in Huey Tat, how many years has it been since you arrived in Thailand?\
2. T-y: Well, this year makes about 12 years since we arrived here in Thailand, I guess.[1]\
3. P: When you came down [2] here what month was it? Did you come down in the cold season or in the hot season?\
4. T-y: Well, as for the time, I don\'92t really know! I was still a kid then, you know.\
5. P: How old were you then? When you came down here.\
6. T-y: Hmm, I must have been only about ten years old.\
7. P: When you came down then, how many days did you have to spend the night \{on the road/by the roadside\}?\
8. T-y: Wow, from when we started to flee from up there until we arrived here in Thailand, it took about a month, more or less.\
9. P: When you arrived in Thailand, what did you do at first to earn a living? To support your wives and children? And to support yourselves? To keep body and soul together?[3]\
10. T: The year that we got here, we \{worked/survived by working\} for hire[4] for the \'93Big Boss.\'94[5] For one day\'92s work five and a half baht. And as for food and drink, the Big Boss helped us out with everything.\
11. P: What sort of work did you do to earn a living with the Big Boss?\
12. T-y: Oh, we did all kinds of work. We\'92d weed the ten gardens and loosen [the earth at] the base of the plants with a hoe.[6] We\'92d do all that kind of stuff.\
13. P: That year you hadn\'92t yet begun to cultivate \{mountain fields/swiddens\}?\
14. T-y: Ah, the year that we came here to live we didn\'92t cultivate yet. All we did was work for hire.\
15. T: That year we didn\'92t cultivate swiddens yet. The year we got here we worked for the Big Boss, a day\'92s worth at a time [7]\'97for a whole year we only did that kind of work to \{survive/eat\}.\
16. P: So working for him that way, with the money the Big Boss gave you, you bought rice to eat?\
17. T-y: Well, as far as rice goes, we didn\'92t have to buy it to eat then! He fed us. Both curries and rice, everything.\
18. P: So how may years did you work that way for the Big Boss? In other words, how long did you have to earn your living that way?\
19. T: We worked for the Big Boss like that for the whole year that we arrived\'97by the second year we had cleared fields, and were living by cultivating swiddens. Besides, [even] after we had managed to \{feed ourselves/earn our living\}, working for hire was still a way for us to get some money.\
20. P: Besides cultivating the swiddens, what other things did/do you do? Are/were there all kinds of other things like raising pigs and chickens?\
21. T-y: Oh, we do/did all kinds of things. By raising pigs and chickens, and selling the pigs and chickens, we get a little extra money, as we keep on doing it, and we get a little bit for it.\
22. P: Now what I\'92d just like to know, your cultivating swiddens, clearing land for swiddens\'97what rules and regulations are there by the Thai government, the Thai authorities,[8] how have they laid them down?\
23. T: So for our cultivating fields here in Thailand nowadays, the Thai \'97 the authorities have issued a command that land cannot be cleared for swiddens. However, since we live on 
\i nikhom
\i0 [9] land, we are allowed to cultivate a little bit. But even though we can manage to earn a living that way, there are still very troublesome things. \{For example/That is\}, the police come up here \{all the time/frequently\}, and when they come to inspect the places where we made our fields, they would like to arrest us. But so far they haven\'92t been able to ruin us.\\\
24. P: Why is it that they say they don\'92t want you to clear fields then?\
25. T: They say that clearing fields makes the water dry up. When hillfolk clear many swiddens, they say there is no water left for the \{towns/cities\}. That\'92s what they say [anyway]. But for us Lahu, if we can\'92t clear fields to \{eat/survive\}, there\'92s no way we can exist. And there is no [other] way for us to be able to earn money either. Since we don\'92t have [irrigated] paddy fields, we\'92d have to live in misery if it came to that [chi qhe \'91like this\'92].\
26. P: When you clear a swidden, how many years are you usually able to keep cultivating a given swidden in the same place? After how many years do you have to begin clearing a new one?\
27. T-y: Well, for swiddens one piece of land is good for a single year. The second year is not quite up to the \{first/new[10]\} year.\
28. T: That\'92s right. That\'92s the way it is with \'93hanging onto old-fields.\'94[11] Sometimes if we get a place where the soil is no good, even [if we cultivate it] one year, even only one year, it\'92s not good enough [to give us a decent crop], and if we go to a second year, even if the plants \{are/look\} good,[12] \{there are no/they don\'92t have\} seedpods.\
29. P: \{So/That means that\} you have to begin to clear new ones. So what I\'92ve heard is, when you clear land for swiddens you cut down and \{discard/abandon\} lots of trees, they say. The \{lifespan/ age\} of a tree is about as long as a human being\'92s, they say. A given tree lives about fifty or sixty years! These trees have a great value for Thailand, they say. The earning power of Thailand[13] depends only on those trees, they say. So they don\'92t want to let you chop them down [they say]. So then, for the Lahu people, if \'97 swiddens \'97trees \'97 fields can\'92t be cleared, how will they be able to \{eat/survive/earn a living\}, this is \{it/the problem\}. What have you been thinking about this? If they don\'92t want to let you clear land.\
30. T: This is what they say. In order for us to \{get/manage\} to cultivate any piece of land, they want to make us Lahu do it \{the way they say [chi qhe \'91this way\'92 (as follows)]\}. What they say is, they want us to plant various kinds of fruit, tea, coffee \'97 and they say that we should make terraced fields. So for this reason, for us Lahu, if that\'92s what [we have to] do, there\'92s no way for us to go on.[14] However, in the future, how are we going to keep putting food in our mouths[15], if the Thai authorities don\'92t help us, for us it will cause a great deal of suffering. Another things is, if we Lahu can\'92t cultivate \{swiddens/mountainfields\}, we don\'92t have paddy-fields [16] either. And we don\'92t have money (\'93silver and gold\'94) either. If you have a few pigs and chickens, and sell them all off, you\'92d be able to buy rice to eat. Besides all that, since we won\'92t have any clothes to wear, we\'92ll be \{ashamed before other people/an object of shame for others\}.\
31. P: When you\'92ve made a field/swidden, after a year or two, if the field is no good, do you abandon it? When you\'92ve abandoned it like that, it becomes a 
\i h
\f1\i0 \uc0\u603 
\f0\i -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  
\i0 [17], right? Once it\'92s become an old field how many years does it take before you can cultivate it again, that old field?\
32. T: After cultivating a certain field, if we\'92ve only worked it for one year, we can cultivate it again after about five years. But [
\i l
\f1\i0 \uc0\u603 
\f0 ] if [we] \'93hold/hang onto the field-bones,\'94 and cultivate it for another year, we should wait five more years, so after about ten years we can cultivate it again.\
33. P: What you call \'93holding onto the field-bones,\'94 does it mean \'93cultivating twice [in the same place]\'94? I haven\'92t understood very well. How do you \'93hold onto\'94 it?\
34. T: Yes. What we call \'93holding onto the field-bones\'94 means cultivating twice, planting two years in the same field. That\'92s the meaning of \'93holding onto the field-bones.\'94 So if you hold onto a single field for two years, you have to wait about ten years. After you\'92ve waited for ten years, we can get a fair crop [out of it]. But it\'92s still not really good yet.\
35. P: Now what the Thai government is saying, is that you can\'92t clear fields for cultivation in lots of new places, right? What they say is, that if you\'92ve got to cultivate in just one place you [just] add (\'93put in\'94) fertilizer to the old field once every year \'97 \{what do you think/what\'92s your opinion\} of that? Can you do it or not?\
36. T: As for that, when we think it over, this business of adding fertilizer up in the hills is extremely difficult. The thing is, since the ground isn\'92t level, when you add fertilizer, and it rains all of a sudden all the fertilizer is carried off, so it\'92s probably of no use to us, we think.\
37. P: In that case, can\'92t you make terraces?\
38. T: \'93Make terraces, terraces!\'94 they say, \'93since the land is very steep, if you just make them you\'92ll succeed.\'94 But it takes a huge amount of time, so for a very long time we would have to suffer and be miserable. Nevertheless, even though making terraces is the best way, if the ground isn\'92t flat, it\'92s a very tough problem for us Lahu. The thing is, there are no places to make terraces. Even if we did finally manage to make terraces, how much \'97 how long it would have taken us, we don\'92t know.\
39. P: If you were to make terraces on a mountain where you\'92ve cleared a field, about how many years would it take? In order to make terraces \{properly/the right way\}.\
40. T: I guess that to go on [q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0 ] to make terraces in a field that we\'92ve cleared in the mountains, making field-terraces, in a single stretch of field, if it would take two months to \{plow/cultivate/hoe\}, then unless [you work at it for] two or three years, you couldn\'92t finish making a terrace for that one field.\
41. P: So then if you guys were just to make terraces, making them for one or two years, how would you plan to eat? What would you look for to eat?\
42. T: Right now that\'92s what we Lahu are talking about. We can\'92t figure it out. We can\'92t figure out what we\'92d be able to eat. The thing is, just cultivating our swiddens, just planting rice, even without making terraces, some people don\'92t get enough to eat. Some years there\'92s enough, other years it\'92s not enough. So during the time that we would have to make terraces, we wouldn\'92t be able to raise pigs and chickens. There wouldn\'92t be enough time. So raising pigs and chickens, feeding them until they get big, and then being able to sell them for money [18] \'97 there\'92d be nothing to feed them with. [19]\
43. P: Oh, well then, according to what you, Teacher [20], are saying, this making of terraces and adding fertilizer to cultivate is probably impossible. But maybe you actually could do it. [21] If they [the government] really does help you, right? They\'92ve got those bulldozers [22], so if they themselves would come and do it for you, move the earth for you, it could be done. But moving the earth just for one or two of those villages, for such a small number of people, they probably couldn\'92t be bothered [23], I think. What do you guys think about this?\
44. T: I think so too. As for their [24] helping us, they can only help is a little bit. The thing is, they don\'92t even help us properly when we \{have them/get them to\} bulldoze a place as a site for a house. For that reason, as far as their using the government\'92s machines to bulldoze for us, when the time to really do it comes, they probably wouldn\'92t do it just for one or two villages. What I think is, they wouldn\'92t do it even for a single village. But the thing is, they\'92ve got a lot of money. And they also have several machines [=bulldozers]. However, it has never yet entered their heads to properly help us hillfolk.\
45. P: Well, it\'92s just like I was saying before, isn\'92t it, that if they\'92re not willing to let you clear land in the hills for a living, there are many stretches of flat land in several provinces [25], so that when foreigners come to look things over they say \'93There are plenty of plains in this country of Thailand, there are lots and lots of places to till and cultivate, so people don\'92t \{die of hunger/starve\}.\'94 So then couldn\'92t you manage to go ask for such a flat stretch, or a wooded plain [26]?\
46. T: Yes. This is the way matters stand. Our 
\i nikhom
\i0  has \{officials/leaders/authorities\}. When we go ask them for a certain stretch of flat land, they say that since the trees are very big, they can\'92t give it to us. And the second thing is, there are forested wildernesses in many districts, there are plains in several places, but they say that some of the places belong to the Big Boss, some are the government\'92s, others are the Forestry Department\'92s; they all have made their claims, so there\'92s no way for us Lahu to get anything.\
47. P: So when they say, this is the Forestry Department\'92s, that plain is the other guy\'92s, this one belongs to the Big Boss \'97 they say this, but you never see them using it [that land] to cultivate, isn\'92t that right? They\'92ve just abandoned [that land], right? They\'92ve just abandoned [that land], right?\
48. T: Yes. Those guys have just laid their claims like that. And I don\'92t see them ever doing anything [with that land]. But since they\'92ve claimed it, we hillfolk can\'92t win over them.\
\
(Ends at line 141.4 of Lahu original)\
\
[1] \'93I guess\'94 translates h
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u769 
\f0  (Pnf)\
[2] y\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  la ve: the villages\'92 previous home in Shan State was evidently at a higher elevation than Huey Tat.\
[3] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 
\f0 -to hu t\'f9: \'93in order to nourish the body.\'94\
[4] tha-\uc0\u331 \'e2 ve \'91work for hire\'92 [not a traditional Lahu activity] < Thai tham \u331 aan (do work). Treated as an OV construction in Lahu, so it\'92s negated tha m\'e2 \u331 \'e2.\
[5] \'9aa-th\'ea l\'f3: owner of a large plantation near Huey Tat.\
[6] q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 \'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  ve: \'93hoe-scratch\'94, here translated \'93loosen with a hoe\'94\
[7] t\'ea ni pu t\'ea ni, i.e., from hand to mouth\
[8] P. uses both the Burmese (ac\'fay\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 ) and Thai (l\'e2th\'e2b\'e2n) words for \'91government\'92.\
[9] A Thai government hill-tribe resettlement center. Lahu n\'ee
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 -kho < Thai n\'edkhom \'91settlement, colony\'92 < Skt./Pali 
\i niyama-
\i0  \'91market town\'92\
[10] 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -\'9a
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u769 
\f0 , i.e., when the field was fresh\
[11] h
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f0  c\'e2 ve \'93\{holding/hanging\} onto the field-bones\'94: h
\f1 \uc0\u603 
\f0 -
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  \'91old field\'92 perhaps literally \'93swidden-bones\'94; 
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 \u660 
\f0  \'91grasp, hold onto\'92; c\'e2 \'91eat; earn a living\'92.\
[12] d\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  \'91be good; look good, be pretty\'92.\
[13] Th\'e2y m\'fb-m\'ec phu 
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a ve k\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : \'93Thailand\'92s getting money.\'94\
[14] ph
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  la k
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  m\'e2 c
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 : \'93there\'92s no way to become.\'94\
[15] 
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a-c\'e2-
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a-d
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 : \'93get-eat-get-drink\'94\
[16] ti-mi: irrigated rice (paddy) field; only possible in the plains, or on the terraced fields (like the Shan and Chinese).\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3460\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 [17] We could translate this conventionally as \'93oldfield.\'94 \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  is a bound morpheme meaning \'91old\'92. Cf. the elaborate expression 
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -p\'ee-
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 -\'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  (DL 1174).\
[18] 
\f2 \uc0\u103 \u776 
\f0 a q
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\f0  h
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u770 
\f0  c\'e2: a 4-verb concatenation. c\'e2 as a Vv means \'91do for a living, do in order to eat\'92, here translated \'93for money.\'94\
        vV vV Vh Vv\
       get to	again, then	sell	eat\
[19] Preserving the Lahu more literally: There would be nothing to feed them so that we could sell them for money after raising the pigs and chickens and feeding them until they got big.\
[20] Paul addresses Pastor C\'e0-bo as \'9a
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 l
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0  \'91teacher\'92 (ult. < Skt. 
\f2\i \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 c
\f2 \uc0\u97 \u772 
\f0 rya-
\i0 ).\
[21] ph
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  ph
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 \u660 
\f0  ve y\'f2: lit. \'93as for being able, [you could] be able.\'94 V1 + l
\f1 \uc0\u603 \u768 
\f0  + V2 is a productive syntactic pattern. DL 1392.\
[22] m\'ec-g
\f1 \uc0\u616 \u768 
\f0  g\'fb
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  c\'e0
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0 : \'93machine for butting earth.\'94 g\'e2
\f1 \uc0\u660 
\f0  \'91collide; butt (as goats); crash (of cars)\'94\
[23] te b
\f1 \uc0\u596 \u768 
\f0 : \'91tired of doing; lazy to do\'92.\
[24] \'93They\'94 here probably refers to the Thai officials of the 
\i nikhom
\i0 .\
[25] m
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u770 
\f0  \'91country; district; province; town, city\'92 < Tai (Si. mya\uc0\u331 ).\
[26] th
\f2 \uc0\u601 \u772 
\f0 -l\'f3: large forested expanse of land}