{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11905\paperh16837\margl1440\margr1440\vieww28600\viewh15300\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 160 Six Traditional Love Songs\
\
1 Singer (with one eye): Would you like to get some songs?\
2 Paul: Sure!\
3 Singer: This time it\'92s not a song for the girls to sing. It\'92s for the guys. Please give a listen!\
\
160a\
\
4 Oh maiden who dwells above the morning star[1] \'97 ah!\
5 If perchance you have[15] no lover \'97 ah!\
6 Please let me speak a few sweet words to you \'97 ah!\
Singer: That\'92s how he goes at it.\
\
160b\
\
7 Singer: And let\'92s do it again. So this time let\'92s listen to what the girl says.\
8 Oh faithful lover who has dwelled beneath the evening star[175] \'97 ah!\
9 If perchance you have no mistress \'97 ah!\
10 Lift up your body\'92s feet, lift up your body\'92s hands,\
11 And come sojourn in the land to the north of the east \'97 ah!\
12 Singer: That\'92s what they say. These are the nice words of the woman. \'93Come to her,\'94 she\'92s saying. They live in separate places, you see.\
\
160c\
\
13 Singer: And now the song \'93Sometime Soon\'94:\
14 Before too long a time has passed\
15 We shall be, shall we not, like the red-headed a-b\uc0\u603 \u770  branch![2]\
16 Each branch going off to dwell in a different place!\
17 Singer: This is a North-country dialect.\
18 At the time they\'92re singing about, the two of them[3] are both living in the north, but in the future each of them is going to a different place.\
19 They\'92re separating. They won\'92t get to see each other again.\
20 This is what the young woman sings. They\'92ll each be living in a separate land.\
21 So then, what sort of thing would you still like to learn now? The things you\'92d still like to learn?\
22 You just have to ask.\
23 Paul: As for what the man\'92s side is \'97\
24 Singer: I just sang the man\'92s side already. You just heard the man\'92s side a while ago.\
\
160d\
\
25 C\'e0-b\'ee (the newly appointed headman): A Yellow Lahu song. I\'92ll try doing it now: <laughs>\
26 In a land to the north of the east you dwell\
27 Maid, if perchance you have no \{suitor/lover/man\}\
28 Please try singing to me with words of love.\
29 Oh, you Lahu [maiden]!\
\
160e\
\
30 C\'e0-b\'ee: In a land to the north of the east you have dwelled!\
31 Maid, if perchance you have no suitor\
32 Please try singing to me with words of love!\
33 Were you not fair this Lahu would not court you.\
34 C\'e0-b\'ee: This is a Yellow Lahu song. <laughs>\
35 Paul: We\'92ve heard that one already.[4]\
36 C\'e0-b\'ee: You\'92ve heard it?\
37 C\'e0-bo: Well, you\'92ve got a very good voice!\
38 C\'e0-b\'ee: I\'92ll try it again. Just a little bit. All the ones I\'92ve done.[5]\
39 C\'e0-bo: Do it well, one song after the other. Do it as prettily as you can!\
40 Now I\'92ll do another one in Lahu \'97 In Black Lahu.\
\
160f unusable\
\
160g\
\
1 Today \'97 er, that\'92s not right yet! \'97\
2 Tonight in the best of all nights\
3 And today in the best of all days!\
4 Let\'92s talk everything over and see!\
5 Say whatever you want to say!\
6 In the north of the east[6] a maiden lives\
7 Even if I were to talk to you until the morning star turns around backwards\
8 I could never say[7] to you all I want to say; I could never tell you all I want to tell.[8]\
9 If I tell you when the moon is shining\
10 If the dawn breaks when the moon is shining\
11 We shall be, shall we not, like the red-headed a-b\uc0\u603 \u770  branch\
12 Each of us will go our separate ways.\
13 Is it not so, O Lahu [maid]!\
14 [the audience]: Wow!\
\
160h-j unusable\
\
Footnotes\
\
[1] This song is appropriate when a girl from the north comes visiting to the south. \
t\'ea m\'fb p\uc0\u601 \u772 -t\u596 \u770 \u660  \u596 \u768 -na: lit. \'93one-sky-morning.star-above\'94, i.e. to the north of where the morning star appears, i.e. the northeast.\
[15] An informant translated this particle ha into ordinary Lahu as the comitative particle g\uc0\u603  \'91with/for\'92.\
[175] t\'ea m\'fb p\uc0\u601 \u772 -q\u603 \u768  ma h\u596 \u769 : lit. \'93one-sky-evening.star-below\'94, i.e. to the south of where the evening star sets, i.e. the southwest.\
[2] The a-b\uc0\u603 \u770  plant is used to strengthen cotton thread after it is spun. When young, the fruits are on twigs growing close together. As the plant matures, the twigs open up, like loves separating.\
[3] The speaker says \'93the two of us\'94, placing himself in the perspective of the woman in the song.\
[4] Indeed, the first three lines are almost identical to 160d.\
[5] I.e., I won\'92t mess up the words.\
[6] Cf. p\uc0\u601 \u772 -t\u596 \u770 \u660  \'91morning star\'92.\
[7] j\uc0\u603 \u768  m\'e2 mi, lit. \'91discuss-not-catch\'92.\
[8] Lit. \'91tell-not-catch\'92}