{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18840\viewh19500\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs34 \cf0 162 The Blind Man, the Cripple, and the Turtles\
\
1 Once upon a time, a blind man and a cripple, leading each other along, went into the woods, and when the two of them had gotten to a place to spend the night on their journey, before they settled down for the night they caught two turtles.\
2 When they had caught the two turtles, the cripple made the blind man pick him up and carry him.\
3 At this point a tiger came by, and when he came sneaking up to have a look, he said, \'93Ah, there are two people over there, I\'92ll eat them.\
4 I\'92ll bite into both of them and eat them all up!\'94\
5 And meanwhile [the two of them] went along together, taking the turtles with them, and [the tiger] went to have a look and said, \'93Oh, this one has heads on both sides! [1]  I can\'92t eat it!\'94\
6 So then the turtles asked the tiger to kindly pick them up and set them down on top of a tree-stump, so they could also just have a look [at the two-headed animal].\
7 But when [the tiger] picked [the turtles] up in his mouth and set them down, they fell off, he kept picking them up and setting them down, but they kept falling off.\
8 Finally [the tiger] violently picked them up in his mouth and threw them away.\
9 He roughly grabbed them with his mouth and threw him away.\
10 Once the turtles had been grabbed and thrown away they went inside the carrying-basket of the blind man and the cripple.\
11 And so as they went on, continuing on their way, going on and on, and ah! they reached a place to sleep. The two of them got there and lay down, and they slept the whole night through, they slept and slept, slept deeply, and they woke up in the morning when the sun was already high, and they got up and went on and on, entering the dwelling place of the Phi-tan-ngweh [2].\
12 And when they got there [the monster] said, \'93I\'92m going to eat you two all up, so let me take a look at your lice then!"\
13 Saying that they [the turtles] were their lice, they took the turtles and showed them to him.\
14 \'93Oh, these lice are bigger than I am \'97 I can\'92t eat them!\'94, he said.\
15 Then (he said), \'93Let me see your comb!\'94, and they took a rake and showed it to him.\
16 \'93I probably can\'92t eat them!\'94 he said there.\
17 So then, this time coming back again [3] from the [monster's] place where the two of them had gotten to, when they reached a certain point on the road, there was in the distance a bird\'92s nest nestling in a tree-top.[4]\
18 So then the hunchback [5] made the blind man climb up [to get it] while he watched.\
19 When he climbed up there, [the cripple] said \'93Did you reach it yet?\'94, and he said \'93Not yet\'94; \'93Did you reach it yet?\'94, \'93Not yet.\'94\
20 Then when he had reached it, [the cripple] said \'93Grab it!\'94, and when he grabbed it, inside the bird\'92s nest there was a snake!\
21 When he looked, when this blind man tried to look at it, he saw that \'93It\'92s a snake!\'94[6], and roughly flung it away, sending it down [from the tree], so that the cripple jumped up and ran away, and that [crooked] place in his leg had straightened out.\
22 [The cripple's] leg now straightened, and [the blind man's] eyes now seeing, the two of them went along together again, and things were now very fine, and they returned home.\
\
Footnotes\
[1] The tiger had noticed the cripple's head in close proximity to that of the blind man.\
[2] 
\b ph\'ed-tan-\uc0\u331 we
\b0 : a one-eyed monster who lives in the jungle. See DL:889.\
[3] Note the concatenation q\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660  q\u596 \u768 \u660  \'91coming back again\'92, where the 1st element is a pre-head versatile verb, while the 2nd element is the main verb. One could also say q\u596 \u768 \u660  q\'f2\u660 , with no difference in meaning.\
[4] 
\b \uc0\u331 \'e2\u660 -ph\u616  t\'ea ph\u616  ph\u616  \u97 \u772 
\b0 : This is a cognate object construction, where the 1st occurrence of 
\b ph\uc0\u616 
\b0  is part of a compound noun, while the 2nd is a classifier, and the 3rd is a verb. See GL:68.\
[5] Here for the first time called 
\b c\uc0\u596 \u772 -q\u596 \u768 \u660 -p\u97 \u772 
\b0  \'93crooked back one\'94 instead of 
\b kh\uc0\u616 -q\u596 \u768 \u660 -p\u97 \u772 
\b0  \'93twisted leg one\'94, translated \'91cripple\'92.\
[6] His vision had miraculously been restored because of his fright.}