{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12380\viewh21300\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 #201 
\b Eating the New Rice
\b0 \
1 Ah! Oh! Oh! This year [1], our whole group, our whole community have come together. You who dwell there in the land of the spirits [2], come and eat this new rice, come and drink this new water, come to eat and drink this year!\
2 Let all of your community [of spirits] also come, oh, whoever are elders [in the land of the spirits], every one of them, everybody, come to this house, come to eat, come to drink.\
3 There is here an abundance of food in this household, so please let there be no worries, no sadness, this blessing and this boon please once again ordain for us!\
4 Just like the Enduring Pillar of White Rock [3] up there in the eternal heavenly abode (of G'uisha), once again ordain the blessings of eternal life upon the womenfolk and the menfolk.\
5 Oh, if we work for one day in the fields, may the food not be exhausted in ten days!  If we work for one year in the fields, may the food not be exhausted in two years!  With these boons once again bless us; please ordain them for us, upon each and every person, upon each and every household.\
6 If we work for one day in the fields, may the food not be exhausted in ten days!  If we work for one year in the fields, may the food not be exhausted in ten years, in one hundred years! For this boon we once again wait [4], please ordain this blessing upon us.\
7 Oh, you with the all-hearing ear, with the all-seeing eye, you who rule over the eternal heavenly dominions [4], you who think eternal efficacious thoughts [6], you who have reached the path to the heavenly land of the blessed, please shower each and every person within this household with your blessings, a blessing for each one, please ordain that for us!\
8 Upon every last person open up the blessing and ordain the boon that when they work for one day in the fields there will be enough to eat for ten years.\
9 Like the eternal heavenly pillar up there, bless us once again with a life like that of the stone, like the stone pillar that forever resists decay and blight, so that the husbands and wives and all their descendants may not have to worry or be distressed, oh, please open up this blessing and ordain it for us, bless us with this boon and ordain it for us!\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
[1] 
\b chi qh\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\b0  'this year' is Red Lahu. In standard Black Lahu these two syllables have been fused into the compound 
\b  c\'ec-qh\uc0\u596 \u768 \u660 
\b0 .\
[2] Lahu ritual prayers frequently make use of Tai vocabulary in order to enhance the poetic effect. Here the Tai word 
\b ph\'ed 
\b0 for \'91spirit\'92 rather than the Lahu
\b  n\'ea
\b0  is used.\
[3] The 
\b k\uc0\u596 -m\'f4
\b0  or 
\b k\uc0\u596 -m\'f4-tw\u603 \u772 
\b0  are roughly carved wooden posts placed in the ground in front of the village temple. (See Plates #17, 58, and 59 in Matisoff 1988.) Walker\'92s Red Lahu  informants had various opinions on what these posts signify. A common view was that they are earthly replicas of \uc0\u71 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa\'92s divine k\u596 -m\'f4-tw\u603 \u772  in heaven, which is said to be of white stone representing indestructible and undecaying permanence. As Walker has demonstrated, the animist Lahu believe that everything on earth has a divine prototype.\
[4] Lit. "we wait to be established within this boon".\
[5] This is \uc0\u71 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa, the supreme creator divinity of the Lahu.\
[6] 
\b d\uc0\u596 \u770 -t\'ec\u660 -g\'e2-t\'ec\u660 
\b0  'thoughts of immortal spirits who only need to think of something for it to come to pass'.\
}