{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12240\viewh19920\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #202 Recalling a Wandering Soul\

\b0 1 Haw, O, O!  This night is indeed an auspicious one!\
The other day this man\'92s soul went away in a direction where it has suffered much trouble [1].  Tonight come back along these silver steps, come back along these golden steps.[2]\
2 Come back again into the four corners of the household, come back to the guest\'92s side of the fireplace, come back to the household head\'92s side of the fireplace. [3]\
3 Oh do not dwell between the feet of P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772  up there, do not dwell between P\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 \'92s hands. [4]\
4 Do not obey the voices of death, do not obey the voices of sickness; do not prepare yourself for the pathway of death, do not prepare yourself for the pathway of sickness.\
5 Listen to the voice of this chicken [5] within the four corners of this house and come back!  Cover your legs up to the knees with this silver jewelry, cover your hands up to your wrists with this golden jewelry!  Within the four corners of this house there are all kinds of food, every kind of drink. [6]\
6 Oh soul, do not jump into the mouth of a yellow bird of prey, a green bird of prey!  Do not jump into the mouth of a yellow tree, a green tree. [7]\
7 Do not think about the pathway of death; they say that over there P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 \'92s hills are precipitously steep.\
8 P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 , you who rule over me, command this soul to be put back between the feet of this man, order that it be put back between his hands. \
9 Up there, G'uisha\'92s Eternal Golden Fowl, K\uc0\u97 \u772 y-kh\'e2-ti\u660  [8] , you have cried one time, do not cease to cry, cry that this man may enjoy a long life!  You two white servants of G'uisha  up there [10], cry that this man may enjoy a long life, cry that he may have a life like rock and stone, cry that he may come back here again.\
10 Some time ago, oh soul, you went away and suffered much trouble. Oh, tonight you are wandering between the streams and the rocks, you are wandering between the hills and the streams. Tonight come back!\
11 Oh, if you are ashamed, cover your face with these leaves and come back, come back, follow underneath this white cotton string, this red cotton string [11]  and come back, listen to the voice of this chicken within the four corners of the house and come back!\
12 Has the soul come back?\
13 It has come back! [12]\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
[1] The specialist who recorded this prayer said the soul of his patient had wandered away into the jungle where it had no place to eat or sleep.\
[2] A poetic reference to symbolic steps carved in wood.\
[3] Guests are seated in the area below the fireplace ( qha-c\'ee-t\uc0\u603 \u770 -k\u616  ), while the household head sits in the area above the fireplace ( qha-c\'ee-t\u603 \u770 -na ).\
[4] The gatekeeper P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772  lives in a large house at the gate of the land of the dead. At the birth of each human, P\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772  knows when he or she will die. If a sick person\'92s soul has wandered towards the land of the dead before its time, P\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772  takes his great staff and beats the erring soul resolutely, sending it fleeing back to its rightful place in the land of the living.\
[5] This refers on one level to the chicken held by the specialist during the rite, but it also seems to be viewed as the earthly counterpart of the two divine chickens of G'uisha. This seems to be implied by the poetic word 
\b p\uc0\u616 \u768 -ca
\b0 , where the 2nd syllable means 'pair'. See note 9.\
[6] Lit., "there are firmly attached all kinds of food and drink".\
[7] This means \'93do not get lost in the jungle\'94.\
[8] The specialist who recorded this text explained that \uc0\u71 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa, the supreme Lahu supernatural, owns two birds: one called \'93K\u97 \u772 y-kh\'e2-t\'ec\u660 \'94 (cf. Thai key \'93chicken\'94; kham 'gold'), while the other is called \'93\u331 \u603 \u770 \u660 -phu-t\'ec\u660 \'94 (\u331 \u603 \u770 \u660  means simply \'93bird\'94 in Red Lahu; phu 'white'). He said that when a person\'92s soul wanders from his body, these two birds call it to return to him. They also cry for the long life of people in general.\
[10] The \'93two white servants\'94 are \uc0\u71 \u776 \u616 \u768 -\'9aa\'92s two birds.\
[11] In Text II of this article (p.24, sentence 9), the soul is also bidden to return by following a red string: kh\uc0\u603 -ni qh\'e2-\'9a\u616  q\u596 \u768 \u660  la \'f4\u660 .\
[12] The officiating specialist ends the prayer by calling out this question to the people inside the patient\'92s house. The people inside the house reply loudly in the affirmative.}