{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12040\viewh17340\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #204 Rite of Divorce\

\b0 \
1 This evening these two young people are divorcing, [1] they say. [2]\
2 Great Ruler, Powerful Ruler here at this place [3], I bring for you these beautiful beeswax candles made by my own hands. By the lighting of these (two) candles [4], we say that the marriage is dissolved. We pray that neither party suffer misfortune.\
3 We people have not broken up this couple, they themselves have broken up.\
4 Today we of this community offer you these beautiful beeswax candles made by our own hands. The village fine of two rupees has been paid.\
5 If it is the man who wishes the divorce, the man must pay the fine; if it is the woman who wishes the divorce, the woman must pay the fine. Once the fine has been paid, the matter has been resolved.\
6 May both sides enjoy good health!\
7 Let the whole village witness that these two people are breaking up!  Let the whole community today witness that this couple are divorcing! [5]\
8 All you elders and youngsters [6],  all you adolescents and children, please let them break up! \
9 It is dissolved! It is dissolved!\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
[1]
\b  b\'e0-d\'e0\uc0\u660 -ch\'ea\u660 -d\'e0\u660 
\b0 : lit. "mutually cast-aside mutually break".\
[2] "They say" translates the quotative particle 
\b c\'ea
\b0   .\
[3] Addressed to the guardian spirit of the locality. 
\b ch\'f2 k\'e0\uc0\u660  ve k\'e0  
\b0 'here' is poetic language for
\b   ch\'f2 k\'e0\uc0\u660  ve t\'ea k\'e0
\b0 , where the classifier 
\b k\'e0
\b0  appears after the numeral
\b  t\'ea
\b0  'one'.\
[4] Walker (1976:179) had never personally witnessed this rite, but was informed that two candles were involved.\
[5] Lit., " O, all you villagers, today they are divorcing."\
[6] 
\b \'fa-phu
\b0   'elders' (lit. "white-haired ones");  
\b \'fa-n\'e2\uc0\u660 
\b0  'youngsters' (lit. "black-haired ones").}