{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11500\viewh19060\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #205 Funerary Chant (i)\
\

\b0 1 Oh! Oh! This man has departed for P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 -\'9aa-ph\u97 \u772 \'92s country. [1]\
2 Ah! He is separated from his wife and his children and from all his animals; these two, husband and wife, are now separated, and he is living in P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 -\'9aa-ph\u97 \u772 \'92s country.\
3 Ah! From today and hereafter let him, and his wife and children not seek one another.\
4 You [2] are not the same as you were before [3], so what (your spirit) craves is to stay over there in\
P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 -\'9aa-ph\u97 \u772 \'92s country.\
5 Now, from today and hereafter, your wife works in the fields like everyone else, she is looking for a new husband [4], so let her live in peace. [5]\
6 You have become a spirit, so when you go to P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 -\'9aa-ph\u97 \u772 \'92s country, go carefully, and there carefully look for and marry a new wife.\
7 You are not as you were before, so look for and marry a new wife from over there.\
8 Your wife and children are here, so let her marry someone from here. She does not disrespect you, for you must leave now, and over there in P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 -\'9aa-ph\u97 \u772 \'92s country you must look for and marry a new wife.\
9 You are not as you were before. From today and hereafter, when you leave, go carefully! From now on, do not cause trouble for your wife and children, or for your livestock; let them live here in peace.\
10 You go and seek [a new family and new livestock] in P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 -\'9aa-ph\u97 \u772 \'92s country, Oh go, go carefully! [6]\
\

\b Footnotes
\b0 \
[1] P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 -\'9aa-ph\u97 \u772 : the boatsman or gatekeeper at the "shore" (
\b p\uc0\u117 \u772 
\b0 ) of G'uisha's heaven. He decides who may enter. Also called simply P\uc0\u117 \u772 -ph\u97 \u772 . 
\i\b See "Recalling a wandering soul".
\i0\b0 \
[2] The first part of the chant is addressed to the surviving villagers, but at this juncture the officiating specialist begins to address the deceased\'92s spirit (\uc0\u596 \u768 -ha) directly.\
[3] Lit., "your appearance is not you".\
[4] This lie is supposed to encourage the deceased\'92s spirit to leave, since he will now want to find a new wife in the land of the dead.\
[5] 
\b ch\uc0\u603 \u770  ph\u603 \u768 \u660  p\'ee
\b0 :  lit., "make her able to live". That is, \'93Unlike you, she is not a spirit, so do not try to take her with you to the land of the dead.\'94\
[6] The non-3rd person benefactive particle
\b  l\'e2 
\b0 shows that the spirit's departure is for "our" benefit, i.e. the benefit of the deceased's family and of the whole village.}