{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12940\viewh21300\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\sl480\slmult1\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #207 Prayer for Game\

\b0 1 Oh today, at this place, I offer you this silver altar, this golden altar [1], you who watch over the seven thousand male and female pigs on the right-hand side, you who watch over the seven million male and female pigs on the left-hand side, you rulers, great princes of this place. [2]\
2 Oh, I beg for male and female pigs, I beseech you for male and female barking deer.\
3 Today I bring for you these offerings, I place them under your feet and under your hands. [3]\
4 Oh, do not block me up with distress! Make them easy for me to shoot! Bind them with your chains of iron and brass! And when I am stalking around the summit of a hill, take and put them at the summit of the hill; when I am following a trail around the foot of a hill, take and put them at the foot of the hill!  Cover [their eyes] with leaves!\
5 Oh, one half [of the meat I obtain] I wish to contribute according to the sharing customs of the elders, I wish to follow the customs of the menfolk and the womenfolk [4]; one half I desire for my wife and children, and for my kinsmen.\
6 I pray to you not to make us suffer! [5] Please provide sustenance for us!\
7 Today grant that the evening star not set, that the moon not set [before I succeed]!  When I am stalking around the summit of the hill, take and put them at the summit of the hill; when I am following a trail around the foot of a hill, take and put them at the foot of the hill!\
8 We human beings lack your all-hearing ears and all-seeing eyes! [6].  Within your feet and hands I beg and beseech you, that you cause us no suffering!  Today, before the evening star has set,  before the moon has set, please provide us sustenance!\
9 Oh, when you put them over there at the summit of the hill, cover [their eyes] with leaves!  Bind them in your chains of iron and brass, put them right in front of me and lead them to my big gun of iron and brass!  You who have supernatural powers, I myself have none, but I put my humble request under your feet, under your hands.\
10 Oh, today I offer you this silver altar, this golden altar; I offer you these silver pendants, these golden pendants [7].  I offer you this splendid food and drink, and I put my prayer under your feet and under your hands.\
11 Please provide us sustenance!\
12 One half I desire for my wife and children, with one half I wish to follow the customs of the elders, I wish to contribute according to the customs of the menfolk and the womenfolk.\
13 I pray to you under your feet and hands, for male and female pigs, for male and female barking deer, enough to divide up and enjoy [8! ] Give us sustenance!  Today, before the setting of the evening star and the moon!\
14 Oh, please accept [my offerings and my prayers]!\
\

\b Footnotes\

\b0 [1] 
\b  th\uc0\u105 \u772 -\u331 \u601 \u770 -th\u105 \u772 -kh\'e2
\b0 : 'silver and gold altar'. A poetic way of referring to the modest construction of bamboo used in this prayer. [See Plate 38 in Matisoff 1988.] The spirits are conceived of as powerful but rather stupid, easily deceived by hyperbolic language.\
[2] This prayer is directed mainly to the Hill Spirit (
\b qh\uc0\u596 -n\'ea
\b0 ), the guardian of the game in a certain area, but in order to avoid any problems, it is also addressed to the local Shan legendary princes or deities.\
[3] Lit., "they have reached your feet and hands".\
[4] This is a poetic reference to the traditional way of dividing up any large game, which requires that special portions go to the village headman, senior priest, blacksmith, father-in-law of the man who shot the animal, people who help butcher it, and the man who shot the animal; then finally to every household in the village.\
[5] 
\b t\'e2-h\uc0\u97 \u772 -t\'e2-\u103 \u776 \u596 \u770  p\'e8\u660  l\'e2
\b0 : The verb 
\b p\'e8\uc0\u660 
\b0  'give; bestow' here functions as a causative post-head auxiliary, like its more common synonym 
\b p\'ee
\b0 .\
[6] Exaggerated humility is one of the strategies commonly used to try and win the spirits\'92 good will.\
[7] These refer to paper streamers of interlocked rings of paper attached to the "altar".\
[4] That is, \'93Let me shoot large animals, not small ones like squirrels and birds\'94. Lahu do not customarily divide up small game.}