102 The Stupid Son-in-law Beats a Benevolent Bonze

1. Once upon a time there was a certain person.

2. He {would/used to} go and set traps for animals.

3. One day when he was setting traps, an old Buddhist monk [1] who had gone there to pick 
sticky berries [2] to eat caught sight of a barking deer [3] that {was/had been} trapped [4].

4. When he saw the trapped barking deer, he set it free.

5. After this, he [the trap-setter/stupid guy] went home.

6. When he got home he said to his father-in-law, "grand-dad" [5], we must have trapped 
somebody else's calf!" [6]

7. So then he went off again [to set traps].

8. Once again he trapped a barking deer.

9. And again it was set free.

10. "Grand-dad, I just keep trapping somebody else's calf, and it's been set free!", he said.

11a. This time the father-in-law said, "Grand-dad [7] tells you [to say], 'No matter what it is, 
it's my grand-dad's kitty-cat!'"[8]

11b. "Hurry and bring it [home]!", he said.

12. So the next time that the senior monk went to pick sticky berries to eat, he was waiting for 
him.

13. So when he saw him, he cut down a {cudgel/club} [from a tree] and beat him with it.

14. While he was beating him, [the monk] said "kh__ t__, kh__ t__!"[9]

15. "Kh__ t__ or no Kh__ t__, it's my old man's pussy/kitty-cat!" he said. [10]

Footnotes:

[1] phˆ_-tu_-m__: 1st syllable < Tai (cf. Si. phr‡_ 'lord; sacred thing')
[2] qh_-m_-_i_: lit. "mountain eye", I kind of sticky tart whitish berry. See DL:302.
[3] ch_-k_-m_, lit. "dwarf deer." This name for the barking deer is especially characteristic of 
YL. The usual BL form is ch_-p’-qw___. Later in the text the variant ch_-qw___ occurs.
[4] This sentence was somewhat garbled by the speaker: phˆ_-tu_-m__ t g_‰ qh_-m___-_i_ 
ca g____ l___ qay l_, [phˆ_-tu_-m__-l— t mˆÑeÑch_-k_-n_ y_ ˆ_ p” ve y˜]. The portion in 
brackets has been edited to: ch_-k_-n_ t kh_ y_ ˆ_ p” ve thˆ_ g_a m__ ve y˜.
[5] __-pu_ (voc. ˆ-pu_) means either 'grandfather' or 'father-in-law', according to context. 
Vocatively it seems best to translate it as "grand-dad" or "gramps," even when 'father-in-law' is 
understood.
[6] The stupid guy is making two mistakes: (a) he takes the barking deer for a calf; (b) he let the 
monk free it because he thought it must have belonged to somebody.
[7] Here the father-in-law uses the kin term as a 1p pronoun.
[8] The father-in-law, realizing that his son-in-law is not the sharpest knife in the drawer, uses 
the baby-talk word m__-m__ 'kitty; pussy' (cf. m__-ni 'cat') as a general term for 'animal'.
[9] Shan or N. Thai kh__ 'beg, supplicate', t__ [apparently a verb particle expressing an urgent 
request].
[10] The son-in-law treats the foreign phrase kh__ t__ as a verb compound, negating it in the frame 
V1 + m‰ + V1 + th__ 'whether V1 or not'. This sentence conveys a highly ridiculous impression 
(which the translation attempts to convey), with its juxtaposition of a foreign phrase and a baby-
talk word. 
