107d A Sticky Problem (or That Parakeet Will Stick at Nothing)
	1 Then there were two [other] people, once upon a time, named q__-n__ and q__-
___.1 2 One morning they were going along together, when [one of them] said: 3 "Let's go 
parakeet-trapping early tomorrow morning, okay?" 4 So the next morning they went off 
together. 
	5 When they had finished laying the parakeet-traps, a parakeet came and got 
stuck2 on it--on [the trap] of q__-n__. 6 Thereupon q__-___ said, "Friend, it's stuck3 on yours!" 
7 Then, another one got stuck over on [the trap] of q__-___. 8 At this, he4 said, "Friend, 
there's one stuck5 on yours too!"
	9 Then the two of them got furious at each other6 and began fighting. 10 As they 
fought, they ended up down in the river--and [all because] he4 had said "The parakeets 
aren't paying any attention to yours!"7

Footnotes
1. q__-n__ is the Black Lahu, and qò-___ is the Yellow Lahu. The names are humorous, 
since n__ and ___ are verbs meaning 'to get stuck' in B. L.
2. The traps were some sort of contrivance on which a sticky substance (bird-lime) was 
smeared to capture the birds. The traps set by the two men were apparently some 
diastase apart. 
3. n__. 
4. qò-n__.
5. ___.
6. Actually q__-___ must have started the fight, since it was he who took exception for 
word ___. See note to last sentence. 
7. Better: "q__-___ ve à_ p_-c__-qa-ni mâ m__ ve" t__ q__-n__ do qô_ ve h__ d__ l_, qò-n__ ni-ma 
y___ jâ l_, y__ q_ d___ dà_ l_ mô _ l__-qá qh_ lo gà qai ve cê. The misunderstanding arose 
primarily through the word ___, which means 'to stick' (=n__) in B. L. but 'look at, pay 
attention to' in Y. L. Also, n__ ve à_ kà_ tê mà ___ ò // n__ ve à_ kà_ te mâ ni ò
mà (B. L. chef. for things): mâ (B. L. 'neg.') _ Y.L. má _ Y. L. mâ 
Maybe also tê 'one' and te 'do.'
