10 Agriculture and the Need for Unity
[TAPE II, Side 1]
66: Well, since wild boars have eaten rice from the Sexton's field,  tomorrow we've got 
to help hunt them down and beat them [dead] for him, right?
67: Yeah, you've got to help me hunt them down and beat them [dead]. The rice itself is 
very good [this year in my field]. 
68: Otherwise you won't have anything to eat. If they eat it all up.
69: Whether we catch them or not, let's go drive them away for him. If we drive them 
away, they won't come back for a while, at least.43 We'll just go and drive them away for 
him. Whether or not we catch them we'll go give them a chase. Tomorrow we'll go…. 
70: Right…. 
* * *
Well, now the time has come for harvesting our rice!
71: Yep, rice-harvest time has come. Tomorrow I plan to go start trying to reap. Since 
the wild pigs are eating away at it. 
72: Kheh-ki, have you managed to try harvesting yet? 
73: Yes, I plan to try to harvest. My field has just begun to ripen a little, too, now. 
Tomorrow I'll go reap,44 I guess. 
74: Jali, what about you?
75: Well, mine is being harvested.44 Even today.
76: I see. Well, how many bushels45 have you gotten this year--I mean you?46
77: Five bushels.
78: Five bushels, eh.
79: Uh-huh.
80: Five bushels probably isn't enough to live on.
81: It doesn't even come to five bushels, unfortunately.47 In my field this year the paddy 
is no good, since they set the damn thing on fire for me, so I'll really only get three 
bushels, Pastor. I have no idea how I'll ever be able to feed myself now. 
82: Ah, you can't think your way out [of a situation like this]!48
83: How about you, Jali?
84: Well, I've got ten bushels, ten bushels for me.
85: Hm, you're a little better off, then.49 Shaw-lu [The Kalin], how many bushels did you 
get?
86: At the moment, I've only got five bushels. But I haven't finished my reaping yet. 
87: I see. 
88: For my part, I've only got five bushels. Because the wild pigs were eating it, too. Half 
of it. 
89: Hm… well….
90: And that's why we kept saying before "Work together, work together! If everybody 
works all by himself, the rats eat it, the birds eat it, the wild pigs eat it!" It's because you 
don't listen to what people tell you, you guys!
91: There's an old saying, "If you would eat, smell."50 That is, if you're going to eat 
something, try smelling it first. Oh, my children!51 Cultivating the land is also like that. If 
you plan to do it, you've got to think about it [first]. Furthermore, if you want to speak, 
you have to think about it first, I tell you. Even if we just intend to speak, we must 
carefully think over [what we want to say]. When we don't listen to people's advice 
sometimes, and disobey, that's the reason why we have to suffer for it this way…. 
* * *
Well, have you tried threshing your paddy already this year? 
92: Yeah, I've threshed it out52 already.
93: How much grain did you get?
94: I got ten baskets53 per bushel [of paddy].
95: If you really get ten baskets per bushel from your field, that's not bad at all. Since 
you've gotten five bushels. From mine I only54 get six baskets or [sometimes] as much 
as seven. Sometimes I only get two basketsful, or one and a half! 
96: Jali, what about yours?
97: Well, mine now, sometimes I get ten basketsful and sometimes fifteen. 
98: I see. Well, [now] I'll teach you children one {point / thing}! Let everybody carry back 
his grain and {put / store} it inside his house! In this country the Thais are very mean, 
and they're apt to set it on fire. If the Thais burn it up, we'll have nothing to eat.
99: No matter how much of it there is, even if I have to spend all day tomorrow carrying 
mine, I'll probably get [the job] finished. I'll carry it home and store it, all of it. It's [a] hard 
[thing] to go and do. However, since these Thais are such irrational people55….
100: Will everybody carry it back to store?
101: They'll carry it back to store [if they know what's good for them]. What [this fellow]56 
carried back came to ten basketsful. But all together [his crop] had come to fifteen 
baskets. So that there were still five basketsful [lying around in the fields]. And since you 
people don't listen to your elders' advice, some elephants came and trampled [the rest]!
102: Ah, me! That's why we said on that day long ago: "When people instruct you, listen 
to what they say! Listen to what they say! When you cultivate the land, work where the 
others are working,"57 we said. But today even the elephants have again trampled [on 
somebody's crop]! That's no way to earn a living! When people instruct you, you don't 
heed their words. 
* * * 
103: Has everybody finished carrying his grain back to store in his own hearth and 
home58?
104: Well, I haven't managed to store mine yet. This weekend I plan to have some 
Thais carry the rice [to my home] [on their shoulders].59
105: Yes, do [have them] carry it all up and store it away! Immediately.
106: Well, I'm finished already.. Because mine didn't amount to very much. [But] I've 
thought it over, and next year, after we've celebrated New Year's, when it's time to work 
again, from then on I'll work together [with the others].
107: Okay.

Footnotes
43. __-hó-m_ _. A hapax legomenon in our data. 
44. g____ qai 'go and reap'; but in #75 g____ qai means 'is being reaped, is reaping, 
continues to (be) reap(ed).' The Vv qai means either 'go and Vh' or 'continue to Vh.'  
45. pù: _________________.
46. n__ à_ _ n__ thà_ Pn 'you (acc.).' I.e., "it's you I'm asking (not Jali)"
47. _e Pv of regret. 
48. d__ mâ t___: lit., "think not come out"
49. The Pv __ 'still' conveys the nuance 'you're still in the realm of comfortable living.'
50. I.e., "Look before you leap." 
51. The Pastor lapses into sermon-style at this point. 
52. It is misleading (and boring) invariably to translate the Vv (a-)ni by 'try to Vh.' It 
sometimes serves merely to 'round out' the V ('have a go at V'h ing'), and is best left 
untranslated. 
53. pî_.
54. The Pn __, used with Num+cef sometimes simply serves to 'round off' the quantity 
expression (much like the Thai ság v or the Japanese gurai and need not be 
translated). Sometimes however it retains its original nuance of 'only.'
55. ch_ kh__ _i ve mâ hê_. lit, "they don't understand human words."
56. The victim of the incident to be recounted never appears as the overt subject of a 
sentence. 
57. "wherever the others work, work there ("here") [too]."
58. <á-qh_-y__-qh_>
59. The Lahu carry things on their backs or heads (pû ve). The Thai prefer to carry 
baskets by attaching them to shoulder-poles (tâ_ ve).
