20 How We Came from Burma
[Tape II, Side 1 #11]
1 [When we were] fleeing here to Thailand [from where]1 we [used to] live in Burma, 
when we were fleeing here along the roads and byways,2 we lived off jungle-greens3 and 
by damming [streams] for fish as we came--that's how we made it here. 2 And there 
was a big flock of kids along, too--er, walking along--. 3 And we had to stay on the road 
a very long time, too. 4 But4 getting here--uh, when it had gotten to be over a month, we 
had come as far as Thayakwei,5 where we made camp.6 5 Looking for banana-leaves6 to 
live off and damming forks in streams, that's how we got here. 6 We made it to 
Thailand.
[7 (whisper) Think carefully before you speak!]7
	8 Fleeing here from Burma we [crossed] the Nam-Si?8 over to this side. 9 The 
time we stayed at Thayakwei was about two months--we were there for two months. 10 
When we were there--
[11 (whisper) Don't laugh!]9
	12 --we were all suffering from hunger and cold. 13 We would go and eat the 
other Lahu's mustard-greens.10 14 We'd go and eat their rice. 15 We were at Thayakwei 
for two months. 16 We would chop down Kitty-cane11 to eat. 18 We'd go eat banana-
{stems / plants}. 19 We'd dam for fish to eat. 20 We came here begging and escaping 
for our food.12
	21 After staying there for a long time13 we continued on to Shajieh.14 22 When we 
arrived at Shajieh we and the Chinese--er, all he Chinese welcomed us gladly and 
cheerfully, and set down cups of hot water15 for us to drink. 23 And they fed everybody 
rice, too. 24 After we ate we took to the road16 again, until we got to the village of Po-
mu17 {up / over} there, where we stayed and spent the night, and we Lahu traded all 
sorts of things with them for food.18 25 We traded away our silver buttons,19 and even our 
bracelets we traded away to fill our bellies.20 26 We had nothing [left]. 27 In poverty and 
distress we were begging and screaming for our food.
	28 Then22 our brethren who were [already] living here in Huey Tad21 came to lead 
us here. 29 They came for us. 30 THey came to lead us here and they took care of us 
joyfully and gladly, and so we arrived here at Huey Tad. 
	31 Having to flee here was a very distressing time for us.23 32 On the midst of our 
trouble we had been separated from one another.24 33 So inasmuch25 as we have 
[finally], by the grace of God, managed to see each other again, we now have great and 
abundant reason to praise God. 
	34 That's all there is [to say].

Footnotes
1. The directional idea 'from' is seldom expressed overtly in Lahu. The 'place from 
which' is usually mentioned without any directional particle, followed immediately by the 
'place to' plus locative particle. See grammar _____.
2. A quasi-elab <yˆ_-q_-h‡-q‡>. Apparently a set expression, though neither the 1st 
and 3rd nor the 2nd and 4th elements are identical. h‡ is probably to be identified with 
the verb 'to spend the night.'
3. ph˜_-tu: 'pith-root'
4. This sentence begins with the Pvnf kˆ_, something which sentences are not supposed 
to do. If this is not an error, kˆ_ is either being used elliptically for c˜ kˆ_ 'here,' or as a 
conjunction = yˆ_-qh‰ kˆ_ 'however.'
5. Apparently a (Lahu?) village just across the Thai frontier from Burma. [CHECK]
6. LSZ.
7. A hissed reprimand by a friend of the speaker. The beginning of the account is indeed 
somewhat diffuse. 
8. FIND THAI NAME & LOCATION OF THIS RIVER.
9. The speaker is a giggly young woman.
10. L‰hu g_ _u g___-c‡: lit. "at the Lahu-others' mustard-greens." Better phrasing would be 
_u L‰hu g_. They were reduced to living off the Lahu who were already settled in that 
part of Thailand.
11. CHECK. m__-ni-g__ "cat-rattan," a small sticky kind of rattan only marginally edible at 
best. 
12. <l__-l___-l__-c‰> lit. "beg-to lick-beg-to eat."
13. t‰-v‰: < Shan lit. "all day long." Here used imprecisely to mean 'for a long time.'
14. At Chinese village. TRY TO LOCATE.
15. g___-h_ "hot water." The Lahu word for light-colored Chinese tea. The strong dark-
orange variety that the Lahu themselves habitually drink is called lˆ-g___. 
16. q___ ph_ la ve: lit. 'again came fleeing.'
17. Near the town of Farng, about 115 km north of Chiengmai. (WHO ARE THE 
INHABITANTS?)
18. pa c‰ ve: '{eat by trading / trade for food}.' Lit, "(they) engaged in trading--for--food 
all sorts of things with us Lahu."
19. A traditional Black Lahu women's costume has some 500 silver buttons sewn on it. 
20. 'Fill our bellies' translates l___, lit. 'to lick,' more earthly than c‰ in the sense of 'eat.' 
21. An advance party of Lahu had already settled in Huey Tad. When they got 
established they sent for their relatives and friends still in Burma. 
22. The five occurrences of the word q___ as Vh or VV in sentences 28-30 merely serve 
as 'narrative-continuation {lubricators / markers}, indicating that the various events took 
place in an ordered sequence (and giving the speaker extra instants to think). 
23. Lit: "The time that we had to flee here was very troublesome."
24. Lit: "one person hadn't even gotten to see the other."
25. 'inasmuch as' is very similar morphologically to Lahu VP + ve __-qh_ lo, lit. "inside 
VP."



