31 Marriage and Divorce
[Tape III, Side 2 #1]
1: (H) Ahem, well, I have a little announcement1 to make to you, brothers. On Monday 
morning2 Jav_a_ and Nah_pui are planning to get married! Now don't any of you go off 
anyplace! We're going to celebrate the wedding, you see. We'll have a feast in joy and 
gladness, I tell you. 
2: (T) Well, my brothers, getting married--the joining of hands in marriage--is a very 
important thing according to our Christian customs. Therefore let everyone remain [in 
the village] in joy and gladness. For this is no laughing matter for us. Since they are to 
take one another in marriage in the sight of God, we Christians must all observe the 
occasion3 with the two of them in joy and gladness. 
3: (H) Well, will they slaughter a pig (to eat)?
4: (T) Well, I daresay they'll have to slaughter a pig, all right. Even in times past--from 
time immemorial4--there has been a wise saying to the effect that when people get 
married, if they don't celebrate it with a wedding feast, there will be no luck and no 
success with the crops [that year], either. 
5: (H) Well, in that case, it ought to be done early in the morning, the whole business of 
killing the pig.5 
6: (T) Yes, we ought to do it rather early. According to my plans we'll kill the pig6 at six-
thirty, finishing with it at seven, then at eight o' clock we'll join their hands [in marriage]. 
In the church. Who all will be in the pig-slaughtering party? Make the arrangements 
properly, each side by {itself / yourself}.7
7: (H) Well, on my side, Ja-ui is one, and Ja-ha is another, and Ja-geh is another. Three 
people ought to be enough, for my side. 
8: (T) Now on my side, Ja-qa is one, and Eh-kha-paw8 is another, and Ja-qu-nyi is 
another--with these three people it should be enough, as far as my side goes. 
9: (H) It comes to six people. That's plenty. We have enough then, with that many. 
10: (T) Well, this girl now,9 I don't really know her. Whose child is she anyway?
11: (H) Oh, don't they say that she's the daughter of Ja-qeh and Na-da_?
12: (T) Ja-qeh and Na-da_'s daughter, eh?
13: (H) Yep.
14: (T) Aha, so that's the one. But I doubt if she can take a husband yet! She's not big 
[enough] yet!
15: (H) She's big enough, she's big enough now. 
16: (T) How old has she gotten to be, do they say?
17: (H) She's eight.
18: (T) Eight! Good grief, if she's only eight, how can she sleep with a man!
19: (H) [laughing] She's thirteen, thirteen and a half!10
20: (Boy) I bet you can't get into her yet.11
21: (H) She's thirteen and a half already.
22: (T) Thirteen, huh? And how old do they say the man is? 
23: (H) I heard them say the man was twenty-five.
24: (T) Twenty-five. Wow, a man that strong can't make it with a girl who's only eight! I 
mean, a girl who's only thirteen.
25: (H) She's big, I tell you. I'll bet she can. She's big [enough] already. Her frame is a 
good size.
26: (T) I wonder just how big her body is. Her frame, I mean.
27: (H) It's plenty big, plenty big. (her frame).
28: (T) The guy is big, you know! Because he's from great stock. 
29: (H) Oh, she's not afraid, they say. Since she's big already.
30: (Kach) Could anybody make it with her now?
[laughter]
31: (H) They say she can, I tell you!
32: (Boy) I still don't really know who she is.
33: (H) Na-hpui, Na-hpui! Na-da_'s daughter. 
34: (boy) Oh.
35: (T) I see. She's a north-country person, isn't she?
36: (H) Right. A north-country girl, from up there. She lives south of Va-na,13 they say. 
37: (Boy) {Yes-sirree-Bob! / Ayuh!}14
38: Is she a Christian?
39: (H) I hear she became one not long ago15--she's a Christian.
40: Has she learned a little about our ways and customs already?
41: (T) Well then, about the {man / groom}--whose son do they say he is?
42: (H) You mean the groom?
43: (T) Yes.
44: (H) Didn't you hear me say he was Ja-qeh's son?16
45: (T) Ja-qeh's son?
46: (H) Ja-qeh's son--
47: (T) I bet they call him Ja-qeh because he's an oddball.17
48: (H) Exactly. He grows tea with the Thais. He's peculiar. 
49: Yeah. 
50: Because they say he acts like some kind of nut,18 I bet.
51: He's a nut, all-right-all-right.
52: He's probably the farmer who--19
53: (T) He's what you [call] a nut.
54: He's probably the farmer who went and stole those people's things yesterday to feed 
his face and who the Thais chased and beat up [with sticks].
55: (H) Of course. He's the guy they were talking about who stole their elephant-chains 
at Melhawmaw--the elephant-ropes and the neck-chains and went and sold them to fill 
his belly! 
56: (T) Ah, ah, ah, ah.
57: (Boy) The one who the dogs were chasing to bite!
58: (T) Now I know, now I know…. Well then, the time has now come to join their hands 
in marriage. Haven't they beat the gong yet?21 Have they beat it already?
59: (H) They've beaten it, they've beaten it. Let's go, let's go.
60: (T) You've heard it Everybody hears it.22 I suppose everyone has heard it, eh?
61: (H) We've heard it.
62: (T) Ah, now I hear it [too]!
63: (Boy) I hear it now!
64: We ought to make it snappy and go.
* * *
[In the church] 
65: (T) Well, since these two friends of ours' getting married today--this morning--
magnifies and elevates the very great laws and ways of God, of all of us have indeed 
arrived, He23 will join their hands in marriage. At this time, do you, Java?,24 swear in the 
sight of God and in the sight of all these people that you will not separate or stray25 from 
this your wife Na-hpui24 as long as you shall live, that you shall not abandon or reject 
her,26 even should she become crippled or blind, even should she become sick or 
unwell: that until27 you must be separated by death you will not separate or stray from 
her, neither abandoning nor rejecting her?
66: (Cà-và_) I swear it. 
67: (T) He swears it. It is well. 
Now then, Na-hpui, [do you swear that] your husband who is now holding your hand--er-
-
68: [prompting] Java_!
69: (T) --this man Java_--do you swear in the sight of God and in the sight of all these 
people that as long as you live, unless God should take you away and cause you to 
separate from one another, whether he should become ill and diseased, or crippled and 
blind, or poor and wretched, that you will look after him, and help him, and take care of 
him, that until you must be separated by death he will be your husband forever? 
70: (Na-ph__) I swear it.
71: (T) she swears it. It is well. 
Well, then, [now] we just have to divide up the pork! Has the pork been divided yet?
72: (H) It's [all] cut up and stacked, it's [all] cut up and stacked. Look over there!
73: (T) Well, how shall we do it?
74: (H) Shall we {cook / boil} it and eat it [all together]? Or shall we divide it up, among 
the various houses?
75: (Kach) Divide it, divide it!
76: (T) Divide it! 
77: (Boy) Divide it!
78: (T) How shall we do it? Shall we make it one share per couple? Or else shall we 
make it one share per household?28
79: Make it one share per household. It's too much trouble [otherwise]. 
80: (H) But look, I have many people [in my house], too or three couples, and if there 
are lots of them they want a lot to eat!
81: (T) Even if you do have lots of people, when it's time to work, they don't do it! Only 
one person [from your house] did any work with this business.29
82: Right! When it's time to work, only one person does it. 
83: (T) [But] when it's time to eat, they want to eat a lot! That's what [I call] being greedy! 
84: (H) Shouldn't this be what you call "acting out of voluntary charity"? If you were 
being charitable, [everyone] ought to eat!
85: (T) To receive voluntary charity, one should also do voluntary work! It's never all of 
us who do the work! 
86: (H) We do work!--
87: (T) Only one person from your whole house, one person. And when he does happen 
to come once in a while, he goes home before noon! When it comes to working. 
88: Would you swear that they don't work?
89: (T) I would swear to it. I never once saw them working.
90: (H) Well then, how much pork will we eat, {all together / in all}? 
91: (Boy) Don't give those guys anything to eat!
92: (H) Thirty-five kilos, we'll eat 35 kilos.
93: (T) Are you setting up a rule31 [that it should be] 35 kilos?
94: (H) I am making it a rule. Starting from today and in the future everyone will have to 
observe32 it, and it alone.
95: (T) If that is the only {permissible course / way it may be done), I'm afraid33 that only 
those who are well-off will [even] be able to set up housekeeping. If you're poor--the 
poor and penniless won't be able to set up housekeeping like them. 
96: (H) As for that, that's something that both sides--the groom's parents and the bride's 
parents--should agree on. There are people who join hands [in marriage] even without 
having a wedding-feast34. There are also those who just kill a little chicken35 or two and 
get married. If your word is good--36
97: (T) Oh, well in that case it's all right. So, how shall we divide up this pork? If no one 
objects37, distribute it to the [various] houses, headman--give it out to the houses!
98: (H) Here, give it out to the houses, to the houses. Give it out to the houses! Try 
dividing it up so each house gets eight MEH.38 Take it and put it in [the scales]! Spear39 
[the meat]!
99: Spear it, spear it, spear it! 
100: (H) Put it in, into that scale.
101: (T) Ah, everybody must lend a hand40 in the proper spirit. Otherwise, if we're all 
arguing and squabbling about it, if they should overhear us, if the others overhear us, it 
would be very embarrassing. We'd be ashamed in front of them.
102: (H) Ah, here come the people! Give out the pork. It's already divided up. 
103: (T) Announce41 it, announce it! 
104: Come and get the pork, come and get the pork! It's for the whole blessed village42! 
105: We're coming to get it, we're coming to get it.
106: (T) I don't see them coming from over there yet, from Jabuuh's part of the village.43 
107: (H) Go call them, go call them!
108: (T) He says to go call Jabuuh's part of the village. 
109: Jabuuh! Come and get your pork, I tell you!
110: (Cà-bù_) [lazily] Let me make some tea first.44
111: (T) There was plenty of time to make tea this morning! You didn't even come to the 
wedding ceremony.45 People like you are hard to teach to and hard to preach to,46 that's 
all there is to it! It never fails. 
112: (Boy) He's just smoking his opium47!
113: (T) He {has a flat forehead / plays it close to the forehead48}, you know.
[laughter]
114: (Cà-bù_) Fault-finding bastards! I wouldn't eat anything of yours now anyway!
115: (T) It's all the same to us if you don't eat! Since we've tried to offer it to you 
properly.49
116: Don't eat it then! You're the only one who doesn't get along with the others.
117: (H) Don't quarrel, don't quarrel. Let's do this charity, let's do this charity, gaining 
grace and gaining blessings.
118: (T) The Sexton's part of the village hasn't come yet either, strange to say! Carrying 
on this way, you people are hard to reason with. Even when we say "Come and eat!" 
you still don't come. 
119: (H) Look up there, look up there, I see his son coming, look up there! Give it to him. 
Give him a {bundle / spearing} [of meat]. One bundle. 
120: (T) Give it to him, one bundle.
121: Here, here, here you are. Tayk50 it away! 
121A: (Boy playingn Cà-bù_'s son)__INAUDIBLE__ It's not even as big as my dick. 
122: (H) Well, it's all over then, this wedding-feast. [We've finished] giving out the pork, 
each house's share. If anybody hasn't come, it's dark out already51…. 

[A few weeks or months later]
123: (T) Well, this time we've got to discuss my son's running back home [and 
abandoning his wife].52 Ah, my son has gone away from you53! And you haven't seen him 
come back to your house yet?
124: (H) I don't see him coming back!
124A: He can't be reasoned with, that son of yours!
125: (Boy) He ought to be thrashed, right?
126: (T) That boy says that I scolded him, that's what he's saying! But I have never 
scolded or rebuked him, not once!54
127: I told you so! "They're not old enough yet, don't marry them off,55 don't marry them 
off!" I told you.
128: (T) Nobody married them off. They did it to us on their own hook.56 There was 
nothing anybody could do about it. A thing like that--
129: I'll bet he ran away [from her] because he couldn't stand sleeping with her.
130: That's probably not true.
131: Sure. If that wasn't it, he shouldn't have run away.
132: (T) I wonder if he left because he was tired of the work. Since {it meant / he was} 
working for other people--
133: There wasn't all that much work, as far as I could see.
134: (H) He's always sleeping, always sleeping--he's as lazy as they come, that one.
135: That's not true. He just couldn't stand the woman. 
136: (T) Oh, good god! Our children are hard to teach to and hard to preach to! I doubt if 
they'll ever be put o the standard of other people's children.57 If you tell them [ to come] 
here, they'll go there. If you tell them [to go] there, they'll come here. Ah, me, me! I'm 
tired of living. I'm ashamed [to compare them to] other people's children.  
137: (H) If you mean that son [of yours], he's a lazy good-for-nothing puppy. He doesn't 
earn his living by working and toiling.
138: (T) That's just it, that's just it. 
139: Oho, speaking of that son of yours, he's got a prick the size of somebody's 
forearm, so--
[laughter]
140: (T) Come now. 
141: (Boy) Well, her big snatch, her big snatch was large enough, wasn't it?
142: (T) Well, I can't do anything about that son of mine anymore. I'll just have to go to 
the headman. I'll just have to go to the headman. Headman! Call all these people 
together, please. I can't cope. 
143: (H) Hey there! Let everyone come to my house tonight! Here's a matter that has 
come up. You may not absent yourselves!
* * *
144: Say, I wonder why there are people shouting up there tonight. 
145: (T) [playing the role of a bystander] Oh, they say it's about somebody's son. 
Somebody's son can't stay with his in-laws58--
146: Always, always, it's about somebody's son!
147: God, I'm tired to death of listening to stories about somebody's son!
148: (Boy) No, sir, I'm not going. I'm not going.
149: (T) You can't absent yourselves, boys. That's been pounded into your heads59! 
You've really got to go. Like60 it's been drummed into everybody's head: you cannot 
absent yourselves. Somebody if you have a case for discussion you won't have 
anybody to listen to you.61 You ought to go and listen, even if you don't say anything or 
help to do anything. 
[Three people talk at once]
150: (H) Well, has everybody arrived?
151: (T) Yes, we people are all that there will be, I guess.
152: (H) Come in, come in!
153: Let's discuss it till we get to the bottom of it.62
154: (H) Our business this evening concerns this pair of young people. These young 
people have behaved thus-and-so. All of you consider what is to be done. 
155: (T) [in role of pastor] Dear Lord! After swearing and vowing in the sight of God, and 
taking each other and marrying one another, how could it63 be good for them to act this 
way! How could it63 be in accordance with the will of God, acting in this manner! I am 
your Pastor, so let me give you some words of instruction. If you wish to listen, that's up 
to you. If you don't want to listen, that's up to you. I say it is not in accordance with the 
will of God! 
156: (H) [addressing the young man's father] Well, as far as this son [of yours] running 
back to you goes64, it's because of your upbringing and your teaching and your 
instruction that he acts this way. You are to blame for not sending him back [to his wife]. 
157: (T) [playing role of groom's father] Ah, this so of mine is unteachable and 
uninstructible! All of you have known long since65 that he's hard to teach to and hard to 
preach to. There's nothing to be done. Since you've got the son [here in count] you've 
just got to put the son on trial and tell him what to do.66
158: (H) Well, it has been several days now since you led67 your son back to your 
house. Whatever is going on, you ought to know all about it. It's your son, after all.
159: (T) Well, then, you're telling me [that I've got] t pay compensation, aren't you!
160: If you don't [stay] married, you've got to pay compensation.
161: (H) Decide the case!68 Decide the case!
162: (The groom) Whether I live or die I'm not going to have [that woman]!
163: (H) Well, my brother, look here,69 let us try to bear in mind the principles which our 
ancestors used to observe of old, and act accordingly, shall we? Like when a husband 
and wife say they will get divorced,70 whichever one it is who doesn't want to stay 
married and [who wants to] cast the other off, he is the one who must pay for it. Our 
ancestors have had such a rule and such a precept.71
164: (T) Yes, although some say that "people are greater than the law,"72 we are all 
under the law. Anybody is. 
165: That's right, that's right. However you slice it.73
166: (T) Come on and give the verdict!
167: There's nothing he can do now.74 His obligation75 is too great. 
168: (H?) Well, for our guiding principle let us act according to those which were 
observed in the days of our ancestors, shall we not, my brothers? According to the 
practice of our ancestors, whenever anyone didn't want to stay married and cast off [a 
spouse] he had to [pay] fifteen rupees.76 And in case there were children, it was thirty 
rupees.77 Tonight you all [should settle] this matter according to the rule observed by our 
forefathers that "He who abandons [his spouse] must pay for it."78 
169: Pay the money, pay the money!
170: (The husband) Here, here, here [it is].
171: Count it, Headman, count it.
172: (T) If it comes to 150 baht, it's customary [for the headman] to deduct79 15 baht, 
you know. The "listening-price." Here, you take 135 baht with you. This 15 baht is taken 
out to cover the "sitting expenses" for all these people--the tea money and the tobacco 
money.
173: So here, take it, take it, take it already!80
174: [chuckling] Since you've paid me my compensation, that's all there is to it. 
175: (T) Well, this business is over and done with. 
 
Footnotes
1. kâ lâ tù __-l_ 'a matter to let you hear'
2. _í p__ mû-___ qo _ "on the morning when the week is finished." Sunday is _í-ni.
3. lit: 'must all do [it].'
4. tê co p__ tê cá: for Q1 + p__ + Q2, see grammar, _____. 
5. tê g___ is a group classifier: "all the various things connected with the pig-killing." 
Eating a pig is a very special event for the impoverished Lahu; something that is done 
only a few times a year. 
6. và_ d___ ve: lit. "beat the pig (to death)."
7. That is, the bride's side and the groom's side each designates several men for the job 
or honor of serving on the slaughtering-team. 
8. A Shan name.
9. The Pn m_ conveys a nuance of wonderment. See grammar, _____.
10. The Headman was only teasing.
11. bè k_ ve: lit. "to tempt inside," i.e., to accomplish intromission of the male member. 
12. __-__-ma 'a female body.' cf. __-__-phâ 'a male body.' __-to is a Shan borrowing. 
13. A village in eastern [check] Shan State, Burma. 
14. The boy is imitating the northern-dialect way of saying "Yes."
15. ca ph___ la g__ __: Vh + g__ 'to be new at Vh' ing.' Usually mean 'to Vh for fun.'
16. The Headman is confused (see speech 11)--either he forgot that cà-q__ was the 
bride's father or else both fathers-in-law have the same name. 
17. q__ __ ve means 'to be peculiar, queer.' It is common to assign nicknames by prefixing 
cà-(men) or na-(women) to nouns or adjectives describing salient aspects of the 
individual's character. 
18. kâ_-ku ve (slang) "be an eccentric, a nut." Lit: 'be cold and dried out,' as in yâ_ kâ_-
ku 'dried fish,' _ kâ_-ku 'dried boiled rice.' 
19. This speech is interrupted (see #54); given the radical difference between English 
and Lahu word order, in translating there is nothing one can do here but indicate the 
first few words of the English translation, rather than of the Lahu original (yesterday 
others' things) 
20. A place not far from the village where the Thai keep elephants to work in the teak-
forests. 
21. To summon the villagers to the church.
22. l.l., 'everybody except me.'
23. We know that God is the subject because of the 3d --> 3d benefactive verb pî. If the 
Pastor were the subject, the Pv lâ would be used instead. 
24. Here, as in speeches 67, 68, and 69, the speakers mistakenly use the names cà-q__ 
and na-dà_ instead of cà-và_ and nà-ph__ for the bridal pair. The former names are 
'really' those of the bride's parents! See speeches 11 and 16. 
25. <mâ phâ_ mâ g__> "not-separate-not-visit [other women]"
26. <mâ chi mâ bà> "not-pick up-not-throw away"
27. Lit: "{if it is not that / unless} you must etc."
28. A household may include grandparents and/or collateral relations. 
29. I.e., helping with the preparations for the wedding.
30. bo te ve. I.e., "shouldn't everyone be fed, regardless of whether he worked or not?"
31. __-lî t_ ve. It is the headman's perojotive, subject to approval by the village at large, 
to lay down general guidelines of this sort. 
32. __-lî y__ ve: lit. "use the rule"
33. à-mù … (p__ à) serves to introduce warnings or unpleasant predictions.
34. (SUBTLE) Lit: "There are people who, even if they join hands [in marriage], don't 
have a wedding-feast." Lahu attaches the concessive marker to the opposite clause 
from the English. 
35. g_â_-m__-cwî is said to be a Red Lahu word. g_â_-m__-úi is the 'quail-tailed chicken' 
(H.Y.). 
36. The Headman leaves the rest of his thought unsaid: "As long as you are a man of 
your word, any arrangement you might make will be all right." The Headman has 
retreated from his previous hasty statement which was interpreted as laying down a 
blanket rule of 35 kg of pork per wedding. He only meant to say, he now claims, that if a 
pig is slaughtered by a wealthy bridal pair, it should be of a standard size. 
37. mâ hê_ qo 'if not; otherwise.' Here elliptical for something like ni-ma mâ c__ pa c__ ve 
mâ hê_ qo "if there is no one who disagrees."
38. hí m___: 800 grams. A m___ is 1/10 of a kilogram. 
39. th_ ve: 'pierce a hole in a piece of meat and put a bamboo strip through the hole for 
a handle'
40. lit: "must try helping" g_a ga ni pî (vV Vh Vv Vv)
41. kù pî ve: "call out (to someone).' 
42. <tê-qhâ_ tê-l__>
43. A qhô is a subdivision of a village, including 2 or 3 houses connected by 
geographico-polico-consanguineal ties. [CHECK]
44. là t_ d__ "put on [the fire] tea to drink."
45. là_-q_ tô_ k__ "the place where the hands were joined."
46. <ma ha _ê_ ha>
47. ya-phyi l___ ve: lit. "lick opium"
48. na-qa-p_ pâ-nê __ te ve "to do it near the forehead," or "to make one's forehead flat" 
(pâ 'feat,' (pâ-)nê 'near'). I.e., to be obtuse or stubborn. 
49. I.e., we've fulfilled our societal obligation, so we don't care whether or not you fulfill 
yours. 
50. yù ___ v_-_ (Vh Vv Pv): ___ is Yellow Lahu for ni (Vv = 'Vh and see'). The dialect mixture 
is intended to be humorous, as is the Cockney rendition of 'take.' 
51. I.e., if somebody hasn't come to pick up his meat yet, it's too late now. 
52. q___ (vV) ph_ (Vh) qò_ (Vh) e ve: "to flee and come back home."
53. The speaker is addressing the bride's father.
54. This speech would be more appropriate in the mouth of the bride's father. The 
Pastor is playing several roles at once! 
55. ka ve: 'to give in marriage; to arrange a marriage'
56. y__-c__ ve (lit: 'he [himself] is right') is a S-P cpd meaning 'to do sthg. on one's own 
initiative.'
57. _u yâ l_ _u ve: "to be the same as others' children's matters." Usually simply _u l_ _u 
ve "to be up to other people's standards." cf. Agriculture [check], _____.
58. _u yâ _u g_ mâ ch__ ph___: lit. "somebody's son can't stay with somebody."
59. Lit: 'pounded into your foreheads'.  ó-qo is also usable in this idiom. See the next 
sentence but one. 
60. qhe 'thus' used as a sentence-initial conjunction is rather like the hippy use of 'like.'
61. I.e., unless you go listen to others' problems now.
62. qha ni ___ j__ dà_ ò (_ lò) > j__ dà_ qha ni ò ___ (Pvf IMPV) "until we look at it"
63. This rhetorical question translates the Pvf of wonderment n__-_ ~ n__-__.
64. yâ chi qô_ ve n__ q_ ph_ q___ e ve qô_ qo _ would be better style. 
65. ô thâ tê ni (qô_ qo).
66. Without wasting time trying to blame the father for his son's behavior. 
67. The speaker uses the expression __ qò_ e ve 'to lead back home,' hereby implying 
that the son left his wife on the father's instigation. See also speech #156 above. 
68. tâ_ ve is a Shan borrowing meaning 'to pass sentence.'
69. The emphatic Pvf nè is here used as an attention-getter, separated from the rest of 
the sentence by comma-pauses. 
70. bà dà_ ve: "cast each other away"
71. <__-lî __-kh__>
72. ch_ _ hì_ mâ _ "people are great, the law is not great."
73. Lit: "however you do."
74. Except pay the compensation.
75. __-bo _ à_ __-bo is a very abstract word with several distinct senses that are 
interrelated in complex ways. See Dictionary _____.
76. th___. A Burmese unit of currency. One th___ _ 5 Thai baht. The total fine was thus 75 
baht, or $3.75. 
77. "Three khá. One khá (< Shan) is worth 10 th___, or 50 baht. The total fine in this case 
was thus equal to 150 baht, or $7.50. 
78. In more careful language, this sentence would read: yà_-p__ há t__ à-_wè ch_-m__ ve 
__-lî chi y__ a ve qhe k_ a-_ n__-h_ _ "a-_u tê g_â bà ve qo _ chi (tê g_a) k_ a-_" _ As for this 
matter tonight, you (must) put in (money) according to the rule observed by our 
forefathers, that 'He who abandons his spouse must pay for it'."
79. 15 bà_ _ p__ (Vh) l_ yù (Vh) j_ (Pv): "customary (Pv) to {waste / spend} 15 baht and 
(have it) taken (by the headman)"
80. The speaker is carried away in a plethora of particle-repetitions. 






























 


