69 Picking Tea
[Tape VI, Side 2]
1. Càbo: Well, let's talk a little bit about picking tea.  A-kí, have you tried your hand at picking 
tea yet this year?
2. A-kí: Well, I've only managed to go picking one day so far.  Since I'm so busy hoeing my rice-
field.  But my tea is {doing fine/flourishing}1!  I just haven't managed to pick it yet.  I'll just 
finish hoeing my field first.
3. Càbo: A-qai, Thû-yì—have you done any tea-picking yet?
4. Thû-Yì: Oh, I've picked two days already.
5. Càbo: Is it good and thick?2
6. TY: Well, a little bit of it is doing nicely.  Some of it has gotten rough3 though.
7. Càbo: Oh, then have you already tried carrying it down to sell at the tea-market4 "place where 
you sell tea"?  Way over there [at the tea-factory].
8. Thúyì: I've already tried going there.
9. Càbo: This year how much do they say you get for one kilo?
10. Thúyì: They say about a baht and a half.
11. CB: A baht and a half.  Wow, last year we only got 20 satang.5  This year we get a baht and a 
half!
12. TY Those were the leaves, now it's [we're talking about] the shoots.6
13. CB: This year you're going to pick the shoots too, are you!  You know [ôo], when you do 
something like plucking the shoots the plant nearly dies!
14. TY: They told us to do that.  ["What they said was, do it this way"]  Pick the shoots this 
year, then next year, you get to pick the leaves again.7
15. CB: Next year you pick the leaves again, they say.
16. TY: Yeah.
17. CB: Well, well!  That's all right, all right then, in that case!  Pa_-__, this year how many kilo 
did you get when you picked tea?8
18. Pa-eh: Only five kilo.
19. CB: Only five kilo.  What happened, the tea wasn't growing thick, in your orchard?
20 [Whisper]: Because he's lazy!
21. CB: Because he's lazy.  Alas, that's how it goes with lazy people.  They can't earn a proper 
living/food to eat.
22. Pa-eh: Because Thûyì keeps telling me to go visit Thai girls—because that's all he does/he 
just keeps visiting Thai girls.
23. TY: [We] have to go visit Thai girls.  After you work a little—You just [want] a woman—we 
don't have wives yet!9
24. Somebody: When you say "don't go," they don't listen, those guys.
25. CB: How many of them are there, those Thai girls?
26. TY: There's only one, and I've never even gotten to see her kisser! She just stayed down [in 
her home] all the time.10
27. CB: She probably didn't want either one of you.
28. Somebody: They're supposed to be very pretty. the two of them.  Cigarettes—
29. Pa-eh: It's those guys Cà-c__, Cà-g_â_, and Cà-qa_.  They went to them [the Thai girls] 
without being invited.
30. TY: If it wasn't for them, it would have been great for us!
31. CB: Those guys are blushing like girls [__-ma-ps qhe ni yò]! [who does chi tê g__ refer to? 
The guys mentioned in #29, or TY and YPE?"
32. Somebody: Even though they [the girls] said "Go home!" they [the suitors] didn't listen.  
When they said "you ought to be ashamed! [this is really shameful]" they didn't listen, so…
33. Pa-eh: [imitating girl's voice] "I didn't invite you!  And yet you came."
34. CB: Oh, here we are, picking tea. and you act this way.  You'll never earn a living that way!
35. Cà-c__: It's like these guys are just squirting water at each other!
36. CB: Maybe it's because the weather's hot they just keep fooling around, playing around.
37. Pa-eh: The fact is, young men are happy, and—
38. Somebody: It's actually very good, what the two of them have been saying.  If one of them 
doesn't get the Thai girl, the other one will, they're saying.
39. TY: If they [the other group of suitors] hadn't come, I bet everything would have been fine 
for the two of us.
40. Pa-eh: It would have been fine.
41. Jesus Christ [pòthôo, For crying out loud], when you tend your fields and pick your tea this 
way, there's no way you're going to come up in the world.11  When people teach you, you ignore 
what they say, for two years now!  You've been acting this way, both of you…And have you 
finished hoeing your swiddens [upland fields]?
42. Pa-eh: I haven't finished, haven't finished—my field either.
43. TY: Well, as for having my fields, as far I've only finished one tû12 and 20 rai.
44. CB: Only one tû and 20 rai.
45. TY: Yeah.
46. So you got [about] two tû from your field!  Hey, Cà-má,13 when will your father and you do 
the picking, of your tea?
45. Cà-má: Well, mine, I guess I can't manage to pick yet.  I have to finish holing my swidden 
first.
46. CB: After you finish hoeing you'll have at the picking.
47. Cà-má: This field [I mine] I've been thinking I'll probably have to hoe for two weeks.  Two 
weeks and five days.
48. CB: Two weeks and five days.
49. Cà-má: Yeah, two weeks and five days.  After I've finished hoeing I'll go picking, until I've 
finished the job.14  I haven't dug [the necessary holes] for planting my tea-orchard garden yet15 
(là-mì là-kho).
50. Somebody: It'll all be dried up by that time!
51. CB: That's what I thought too!  Mine also I haven't gotten to try picking yet, that tea.  But 
still, more that not being able to pick the tea, in my opinion this is what I think: more than having 
tea or not having tea, I think not having rice is a cause for anxiety, so [only] after finishing hoeing 
the [rice] field do I intend to pick [the tea].
52. Cà-má: Mine [my rice field] I still have to hoe for a month and a half "fifteen days".  Once 
I've finished hoeing I also plan to pick.
53. Somebody: By that time yours will be all rough.
54. Somebody else: And tell him that he hasn't even tilled/taken care of/plowed and picked over16 
his tea-garden.
55. CB: Speaking of his tea-garden, it's kept in a densely overgrown state [he leaves it all 
overgrown with weeds]
56. Somebody: It's because you're lazy, all you guys.
57. Somebody else: If he17 sees it, it will never do, it will never do.
58. CB: Maybe even [mâ _i_ __ "I don't even know"] when he sees it, he'll take it back from 
you.  There's also another guy, Cà-q__, like that, not taking care of his tea-garden!
59. TY [playing role of Cà-q__]: Well, I've had a good talk with the Boss, about this.
60. CB: What did he say to you then?
61. Cà-q__: What he said was, when you have free time for [this] work, just carefully slash away 
the undergrowth18 and then do the picking.  If you don't do this [slash the undergrowth], the tea 
won't be any good, he said.
62. CB: Did he tell you that the shoots would get all shrivelled up?
63. Cà-q__: Yep, he did.
64. CB: Hmm.
65. TY: When I finish the work…
66. CBL Hey, Cà-l__, Headman,19 what about you—haven't you picked your tea already this 
year yourself?
67. Headman: Oh, I'm a great tea-picker, you know!20
68. CB: As for your picking, you keep saying "I'll pick, I'll pick!", but I don't see that any tea 
has come [from you]!
69. Headman: I'm not free yet…
70. CB: You're only saying that with your mouth! Whatever your do [it's like that]…Anyhow, 
maybe it's because you're lazy, isn't it!
71. Cà-q__: Yes, A while ago for once he did pick.
72. Headman: …Wherever I have picked it's nice and cleared off!21
73. Cà-q__: Oh, as for the headman, he hasn't done it [any tea-picking]!  Last year he once picked 
with me, and he did pick very well.  [But] this year, one has to say that he hasn't been so 
diligent, the headman.
74. Headman: It's just as I said22.  In the places where I've picked, the bottoms of the tea-plants 
are beautiful [là_kh__ p__].
75. Cà-q__: He does it well!  That guy, if he's free of [other] work and manages to do it.  But I 
haven't seen him do it yet, as of now.
76. Somebody: So he's good at it—but he doesn't manage to pick much of it!  If it's just that 
he's not good at it…23
77. Somebody: As for getting it, he's not capable of getting very much, not like us, when it comes 
to tea-picking, that guy.24
78. Somebody: Because he's so good at it!
79. CB: Other people—I've heard that others have gotten five or six kilos, while he just got a kilo 
and a half, for heaven's sake!
80. Since he's all duded up, he can't pick tea properly!
81. Somebody else: In order to be able to live on it for a long time you've got to take care of 
[one's crop] very well!  Your (pl.) sprouts are starting to bend and get knocked over25 when 
they're only one span high.  This whole year they won't sprout again!  They'll all dry up!
82. It's just that they're trying to get a lot, by doing it that way.
83. CB: Wow, Yâ-pa_-__ breaks off each individual sapling into two sections and puts them in 
[the ground].  You're lucky the Boss didn't see you!26
84. TY: Well, that's just the way we have to do it!
85. Pa_-__: The reason is, we do it to get a better crop.27  As for mine, the tea plants haven't died 
at all!  The ones that I picked—
86. Somebody: There are lots of people—
87. Pa_-__: We make [break] each sapling into two sections.
88. Somebody: Don't tell me they didn't die!  They did!—
89. TY: Anyway, we really ought to pick it fast!  Otherwise the Boss might take [the tree-
plantations] back some day.
90. CB: Both of you [Pa_-__ & Thû-yì] are young men, so you should concentrate your minds, 
and if you do the work [necessary] to earn a living, if you can settle down and do that, you'll get 
plenty to eat, you two.
91a. TY: Well, you—
91b. Pa_-__: … are good at it
92. CB: They tell me [you've been running around after] Thai girls, eh? ground squirrels, eh? and 
striped squirrels, eh? Taking your gun and hiding wherever you find a shady place—you'll never 
make a living that way!28  When people teach you, listen to what they say, these people!  
[You're] so{stubborn/thick-skulled}29, [you're] hard to get through to—I've never seen the 
like.30
93. TY: Well, what do you teach I listen to, I want to listen to.  Please try teaching me properly!
94. CB: I just teach the best ["This is all I can teach"] I can, to the people.  And you add the 
word "properly!"
95. TY: Other people [i.e., we (Y and Pa_-__)], who {aren't married/don't have a wife}, can't 
[act] the way you do.
96. CB: Well, how much have you usually gotten each year then, when you've finished picking?  
From your garden, Yâ-pa_-__?
97. Yâ-pa_-__: Well, I—
98. CB: I [qhe] mean, what you pick in the course of one year.
99. Pa_-__: I myself, what I pick in one year—
100. TY: Is it more than a hundred?31
101. Pa_-__: It wasn't just ["didn't stay at"] "more than a hundred"!  It was about 300!32
102. CB: Is it 300 then?!  So, it's about 30033, you say, in one year, from his.  Well then, A-kí, 
about how many hundred have you usually gotten in one year, from yours?
103. A-kí: Well as for me, I'm not able to pick everything [I've got]!  Since {I'm all alone/I have 
to do it all by myself}, every year my tea goes rough 34.  I don't have a lot of people.  But 
anyway, it one year I just get about 150 kilo!  As for tea, it's there.  I [just] can't pick it [all].
104. CB: Hmm-
105. A-kí: I have a lot of work, it's not just this [tea-picking] that I have to do.
106. CB: Yes indeed.  That's the way it goes.  We hillfolk cultivate mountain fields35 for a living, 
since we don't have [irrigated] paddy-fields or hó-nâ36.
107. A-kí: As for that, if we keep fussing with our tea, we won't have enough to eat!  When 
we're free [of other work], once in a while we just try to earn some pocket-money ["seek to use 
money"]37.
108. CB: Yes. Well then, Headman, didn't you say that you were going to go ask for labor38 to 
[help you] cultivate?  This year?
109. Headman: Well, I am trying to ask ["go and ask"] for help.  From among you guys, my 
relatives—
110. CB: If you are going to ask for help, that's very fine!  No matter how many people come 
from each household [respond to your request]—whether it's two people or three people.
111. TY: Nobody will come!  Don't go asking them, don't go asking them!
112. Headman: Since I won't be giving them any wages, whether I ask for help or not {is my 
business/depends on me}.  If I ask them and they don't come, other [_u]39 people will be told, 
and when these others [they] hear that they didn't come, it will be their fault [_u à_ c__ ve yò]40
113. CB: Yes.  Do try asking! Even if one person doesn't come, another person will—that's the 
way people are.41  What day are you planning to go ask for help?
114. Headman: I'm planning to go and try asking on Wednesday.42
115. CB: On Wednesday.  Please don't do it on Wednesday.  It's [too] hard to carry the hoes 
back.43  If you do it after the weekend, do it on Monday.  As long as people have carried the hoes 
back on Saturday.
116. Headman: Well, then, I'll do it on Tuesday!
117. CB: Mm-hm.  If you do it on Tuesday, that'll be fine.
118. Headman: [giving the reason he wants to do it Tues. instead of Mon.] For one day I just 
[have/ want to] do to my [field/ swidden] and pick up [my tools] and carry them back.  After 
doing a few licks of work in the swidden too.
119. CB: I've heard that you [guys] now get one and a half baht [per kilo] per person for picking 
tea.44  As for me, I would only get 25 satang, [that's what] they [gave] me.  Even for one kilo.
120. Headman: Wow.
121. TY: It's because you're [i.e., Cà-bo] no good at picking!  Because you're not like other 
people.
122. CB: That's not so!  If you look at what I pick, it's the same [as others].
123. Headman: I don't think it's like that [i.e., that they discriminate in pay according to who the 
picker is].  That it's "each person a different kind"45.
124 CB: Maybe they do discriminate.46  They may like/favor one person and hate another one.
125. Pa_-é: If you don't agree on the terms carefully ["don't talk with each other"], that's what 
happens.
126. Headman: Well, I'm going to discuss this carefully again.
127. CB: You relatives, if you're friendly with him [the Boss]47, you just ought to help me 
speak.
128. TY: It's probably because you're not acquainted with each other.48
129. CB: No, we're not acquainted [_i_ dà_], me anyway.
130. TY: Well, we all are acquainted with him.
131. CB: Hmm—


______________________________________________________________________________
__________
Footnotes:
1. cà ve 'to flourish, be doing well, be luxuriant (of growing things).'
2. cà dà_ à lâ.  cà (adj.) 'grow thickly'.
3. _â_ ve 'be rough, hard; to lose tenderness'.
4. A four-verb concatenation: ca pû h__ ni [go and carry sell tea].  Actually a tea-factory (owned 
by the _athê-ló)
5. one baht=100 satang
6. Ordinary tea-leaves went for 20 stg/kilo, while the tender shoots go for 11/2 baht/kilo
7. The same principle as pruning a tree
8. Pa-eh: Pa_-__h (short for Yâ-pa_-__ "Sonny, Little Boy") was my chief consultant during my 
1977 fieldtrip
9. Fragmentary sentence: ká a-cí te qo, yâ-mî kà_ a-cí-n__-á __ [__-mî-ma] mâ c__ _e_ ve __.
10. By this slang word I translate Thuyi's jocular coinage phû__mê_, reordering syllables of the 
ordinary word mê_-phû_
11. Lit., "it will not fit that you will become like other people."
12. This word is not well explained in DL. (tê tû mì __) From the context here it looks as if one tû 
contains somewhat more than 20 rai
13. má 'be lucky in hunting'
14. mâ p__ c_ = p__ e ve thâ qha-qà
15. Does he mean for the next crop, after he's picked this one?
16. â q__ ph___ ve ___. Picking over referring to weeding rather than harvesting the mature 
crop?
17. _u : i.e. the Boss (_a-thê-ló) from whom Huey Tad rents the tea-orchards
18. ph__ 'slash' away undergrowth—an important part of the Agricultural Cycle
19. Càbo here, showing this is a play, calls the headman Cà-l__ (the name of my citibred 
consultant who accompanied me on my trips to H.T.) instead of his real name Càbí
20. This sentence is glossed "Well, I guess I'll really pick tea for a living" in DL, under ló-lâ_
21. yà qhe ph___ k__ qô_ ve p__-yì dà_ ve ___  This word glossed in my fieldnotes with 
Chinese [Characters], but in DL 861 it's "a cleared-off area (as from cattle grazing a place clean)".
22. ô qhe qha-_wí yò.
23. i.e., we could do with less expertise and more actual work
24. The translation attempts to capture the multiple syntactic inversions in the Lahu: g_a tí qo 
c__-c__ mâ g_a p__ ve, h__-á qhe c_-c_, là ph___ ve tí qo, y__.
25. tà __n ch__ n__ ch__ ve
26. Lit. "It's because the Boss wasn't looking."
27. g_a câ mâ à_/tù te ve "do it to get a lot to eat"
28. slightly revised from actual sentence in my fieldnotes in DL. p. 475
29. ch_ (m)â m__ j_. A formulaic expression expressing rather jocular disapproval
30. nà-qa_-p_ phì __ te ve.  Differently glossed in DL 742, 890
31. Thû-yì jocularly uses N. Thai lo___ pàj [Si. r___j paj] for 'more than 100'. Maybe not 
jocularly, since the Lahu had to use Thai when bargaining with the Boss and his staff at the tea-
factory.
32. This number is also given in Lahuized N. Thai sà lo___ [Si: sa_am r___j].
33. This time Cà-Bo gives the numeral in Lahu: ____ ha
34. If tea is left too long growing, it becomes hard and unusable
35. swiddens, unirrigated, requiring backbreaking labor to cultivate.  See the Agricultural Cycle in 
DL ______.
36. CB uses both the Lahu (ti-mi) and Shan (hó-nâ; cf. Si. râj-naa) for "paddy-field."
37. I.e., whatever money they earn from tea is just for little luxuries, not vital to survival like the 
rice crop
38. g_â ca l__ q__ ve.  Custom of helping out a fellow villager in times of intense work in the 
fields, @ the understanding that this kindness will eventually be reimported when the shoe is on 
the other foot
39. The referents of the two occurences of _u 'remote 3rd person' in the sentence is not clear: l__ 
l_ mâ là qo, _u à_ tho pî ò ve l_, kâ ò qo mâ là ve qo, _u à_ c__ ve yò.
40. I.e., it will not be to their credit, but it's up to them
41. Translating the afterthought topic "ch_ l__"
42. The headman naturally uses the X'n way of naming days of the week.
43. The idea seems to be that as the work-week goes on, it becomes more and more difficult to 
shlep one's tools to the fields.
44. Cà-bo is apparently speaking of how much a Lahu might earn picking tea for the Thai.
45. tê g_â tê ya_n "one person one kind" ya_n < Shan (Su, jàan), i.e., each person differently.
46. tê g_â tê ya_n te ve may be paraphrased as: te ve ká qha-_u_ kà_ pî ve __-phû mâ _u_ 
"Although the work done is the same, the wages given are not the same."}
47. Lit "if you know his words and his breath"
48. TY uses the Thai expression hû-câ_-ka_ (Si. súucàk kan) 'be acquainted with each other', 
instead of Lahu _i_ dà_ ve.  Probably because a Thai person is involved.
