78 Government Offers Us New Lands
[Tape VII, Side 2]
1 H: Well, a message from the government has come to us1, to all of us Lahu. We're 
going to discuss it. Let everybody come here for a while, please…. 
	The matter which we're all going to be discussing this evening is this. {They're 
saying that / There's talk that} they're planning to give us all--all of us [Lahu] who are 
living in Thailand--lands, fields, places where we can cultivate this soil, beginning right 
now and forever after.2 But how is this going to come about--
2 Cà-bo: I'm tired of hearing this all the time. It's always the same old story. 
3 H: Well that's where you're wrong!3 I tell you they're saying that they're going to give 
us land that we can live off forever {after / in the future}, for our own adult generation as 
well as our children's generation! They say they'll give each person about twenty ray.4 
What shall we do [about it]? Shall we go take a look at the places? 
4 Cà-bo: Where the hell are these places anyway?
5 H: Well, I've heard that it's [someplace] over at Pha-pu-jaw5, near where the Meo are. 
Go over there and have a look, they said to me!
6 Cà-bo: Didn't somebody say that they've parceled out that [land] to the Meo already?
7 H: The Meo won't get all of it. [The government] they say they'll give us Lahu our 
share, too! 
8 Cà-bo: With business of giving some to the Meo and some to the Lahu there's only 
going to be quarreling back and forth.
9 H: Oh, they're going to mark off [the boundaries of] each person's land for him, they 
say. They'll measure it off for us. So--who all is going to go? To have a look at it--
10 Cà-bo: Well, I for one am not going. From [as] far back [as I can remember] until 
today I have never lived off a wet-rice field.6 I've grown up working in dry mountain-
fields, and that's all. There's malaria [down there in the plains]! I'm afraid of it.7
11 H: Well, since they're giving out the land, let's go take a look at it. That's the least we 
can do8. Even if we don't cultivate it right away, we still have no way of knowing whether 
we might not gradually come to have to use it in the future. They won't be making this 
offer forever.9 If there comes a time when they're not giving it out [anymore], even if we 
want it we won't get it. We really ought to go out and have a look at it, brothers!
12 Cà-bo: You lead [them there] then. [Take] Ja-keh and his group and Ja-pho and his 
group.
13 H: Oh they'll go, they'll go. One or two of them will go. You should go early {tomorrow 
/ in the} morning, after you have something to eat.10 The official11 said that he'd go with 
us too tomorrow morning, after we eat. He's going to wait for us. So after we eat--all of 
you who want to go, everybody who's going, have something to eat and go up12 and 
fetch the leader, then go off together and have a look. Personally I don't think I'll go 
along yet. Because I don't have time to go. Right now I'm just swamped with work13, you 
see--
14 Thû-yì: For crying out lord, you're the headman. You have to go! Otherwise how can 
you {take care of / look after} the villagers['s interests]?
15 H: Well, I'm not one who's getting any [of that land] yet. It's not there that I'm getting 
any [land], so I wont' go yet. I'm not going there to look. But all of you who do want to 
get some, you go and look it over! 
16 Cà-bo: Well, when the headman informs the villagers about it this way but doesn't go 
himself, I daresay nobody's going to pay any attention to him--in the future. 
17 H: For my part, {I don't want14 / I'm not getting} any [land] over there because it's too 
far away. I'm going to try to get some that's near here. But all of you who want to get 
some, go. If you don't want any--
18 Cà-bo: What you're saying is really very selfish. If it's a place nearby you'd like to get 
it for yourself. But other people you'd like to send off to places far away. If you act like 
that how can this village prosper15?
19 H: No, whether it's far or near, if it suits you they'll give it to you--no matter where it is 
and no matter how much you want.16 I'm not saying I'll take it all for myself! Whether it's 
good land or bad land they'll share it out equally, the same to everybody. That's how it's 
done, when the authorities give things out. 
20 Thû-yì: Well, in that case you certainly ought to go look at it--tomorrow, after you 
have something to eat.
21 H: But I don't want any of it ever at Pha-pu-jaw--really I don't!
22 Cà-bo: Just look at him, just look at him! With his own mouth he says he doesn't' 
want any….17
23 H: Well then, where would you like to get land, eh? Someplace nice and close18, right 
on the nikhom's19 land, not more than a furlong away from Huey Tad, I suppose, right? 
Well, I [also] would like to get [some land] right around here. If it's too far away I just 
can't afford to go and work there. There's nobody [to help me].19 I'm a very busy person, 
you know.
24 Thû-yì: You won't find any place to make a paddy-field around these parts! Except 
for Meh-tha-lai;20 that's the only place.
25 H: No, over around {___},21 on the way to the Cattle and Elephant Market, there's a 
great big plain! If we can only get water it'll be a perfect place. Go look around there. 
26 Cà-bo: How can you {irrigate a field / make a wet-rice field} and {live off it / make a 
living} at Mu-ko-mi-cho21 without any water? Maybe your father could, I suppose!22
27 H: Come now! Up above the valley there's a stream called Titirock23--now if you could 
just go and dig a channel [from it to the fields] there'd be all [the water] that you need for 
cultivation! I guess you haven't been over there to take a proper look yet. 
28 Cà-bo: Without spending about then thousand baht24 you wouldn't be able to dig the 
channel. 
29 H: No, as long as we've found25 a place that we want to have, whatever has to be 
spent or whatever has to be done the government will help us. It's a trifling matter for 
them.26
30 Cà-bo: Yes, a long time ago, the government was also telling us "We'll help you, we'll 
help you!"--but up to today I don't even see a mouthful of tea [that we've gotten out of 
them]. 
31 H: The government says that they can do whatever they set their minds to do. 
32 Cà-bo: Two or three pigs, fifty or sixty big coffee-plants--how can anybody earn a 
living from that sort of thing!27
33 H: Anyhow, {whether we do it or not / if we don't do it} is up to us--{but / since} they're 
offering it. We are backwoods people.28 We're a tiny29 race of people. We ought to listen 
carefully to what the government says. Whatever they tell us we should do. As we go 
forward in the future, if each of us doesn't have his own piece of land here in Thailand, 
our children and our posterity will suffer for it.30 Those of us who are {responsible adults / 
the elders} really ought to ponder this very carefully now. In the past too, in this Lahu 
nation of ours, for generation after generation people have been thoughtless,31 so that 
today whatever we do we are beset with troubles and difficulties.32 We have no 
education, none of the various skills that other people have. It is because we don't listen 
to the advice of others that we have come to this pass. So at this point we should all 
think things over very carefully. Please, brothers!--Li_i, where would you like to get land, 
when they offer you some? 
33a Li_i: [I'd like some near the Cattle and Elephant Market.]33
33b H: Well, that's it, I feel the same as you do. [But] there isn't anybody who wants to 
go to Pha-pu-jaw that we were talking about {before / just now}! And you're telling me, 
"Go! You're the headman!" So what shall I do? 
34 Cà-bo: Since you're the headman, you really must go.
35 H: I don't want to get any [there], I tell you! Even if I go there I'm not taking any.
36 Cà-bo: But you must go and look for [land] on the villagers' behalf even though you 
don't want any for yourself. 
37 H: If the villagers want it, they'll get it. 
38 Cà-bo: You've got to go look after things yourself. If you don't go and watch how 
they're measuring it off, how will the villagers know whether it's being done fairly or not? 
39 H: Well, once they're all through measuring it properly, I do plan to go, you know.
40 Cà-bo: When it comes to doing a job, this kind of piecemeal, half-hearted34 way of 
doing it is really annoying! Year after year [this trait of yours] hasn't changed,35 right up 
to today. It's time for you to realize this. 
41 H: Even i you say you want [a certain piece of land] it doesn't mean that you have to 
{work / live off} it right away. If there isn't anybody to cultivate it at the moment36, you can 
just keep it in reserve37 for the future! We'd better take advantage of their offer while it 
still holds.38 So all of you who have the time ought to go tomorrow! Otherwise you might 
say someday that I didn't inform you about this: that even though they said they'd give 
you land I didn't tell you. I had only told you when they said they'd give it to you! "If we 
had only {known / found out} about it, we would have gone!" you might say. So now I'm 
telling you about it while there's still time, [I'm telling] you all.39
42 Cà-bo: Yes, well, we've known about this for a long time, this whole business. 
However, I don't see any advantage or benefit40 for us if we do work [these new fields]. I 
can only see difficulties. Rather than listening to that kind of advice, it wouldn't hurt41 if 
we paid attention to what the Boss42 says. 
43 H: In the future, when Thailand, this Thailand of ours gets to be packed chock-full of 
people, whoever doesn't have his own land is going to be in trouble, I bet. Now, while 
they're telling us this in good time, we all ought to think it over carefully. They're only 
going to be offering it to us for a while. If we don't watch out "By the time our thoughts 
catch up, the prey can't be caught!"43
44 Cà-bo: Well, as far as I'm concerned, I'm still not going.44 You all can discuss it and 
go if you want to. 
45 H: Well, then, this is where the matter stands. If there's anybody who wants to go, let 
him go tomorrow. That's all there is to it. As for me, I won't be going yet. I don't have the 
time yet. Because I'm very busy working, seeing that I don't have anybody [to help me]. 
Among all of you who want to go, [why don't] some of you get together45 and go off 
hunting our furry friends46 from Cattle Market there over to Porcupine47 Mountain, and 
make yourselves a good roast and continue on from there!48
46 Thû-yì: Well, but did they say they'd dig out the paddy-fields for us? What did they 
say they'd do? 
47 H: No, they're not going to dig out the field for us. We've got to dig ours out all by 
ourselves. We'll have a go at a it, then if it turns out that we can't, in case we're not able 
to do it,49 we'll just {tell / say no to} the government, the government will take care of us 
and help us, they said. Also, in the matter of bringing water [to the fields], even if it's a 
long way, if the regime--er, if the government50 helps us, we'll make it all right. Little 
people that we51 all are, we've been thinking "This is impossible and that is impossible"--
that's how we think. But, look, if we don't have fields, land to till, whatever we might try 
to do in the future, it will really be impossible [for us to get anywhere]. Everybody had 
better think this over mighty fast…. 
	Elephant-and-Cattle-Market, now, [that's a place] I'd like to get, too.52 They say 
the tree-stumps [there] are big, but we [could] chop them out, [to make our] fields. In a 
year or two we could have them burned out and be earning a living from our paddy-
fields. Oh, I'm sure we could!
	So, as far as I'm concerned, I want the big stretch of flat land above Cattle 
Market--the whole plain, above everybody else's [fields].
48 Cà-bo: You're so greedy! That's just it. That's why nobody wants to go [with you], 
why nobody wants to follow your lead! 
49 H: Ha, ha! That's nonsense, that is!
50      : He's right, he's right!
51 H: Okay, okay, I'll take [land] at the tail-end of everybody instead,53 if that's the way 
you feel. Way below everybody else, down at the {rocky ground / Rock-thresh}54--
[Everybody talks at once]
52 Thû-yì: Hold on! The land down there is mine!
53 H: The plain ….. [The rest is drowned out]
54 Cà-bo: Just look at him, just look at him, now-- [rest is unintelligible]
55 Pà-__: It's mine, it's mine! The land down there is mine! 
56 H: Look, when the authorities give it to us, we'll carefully measure it off, the good 
places as well as the bad, and divide it up. Everybody will get an equal share.55
57 Thû-yì: Me, if it's bad land I'm not taking it!
58 Pà-__: I won't take it either--I won't!
59 H: [That's so unreasonable]56 what you've been saying. When I said I'd take the 
upper part, you said you wouldn't give it to me. But according to what our forefathers 
said long ago, it's the lower part which is to be taken. Because when you get land below 
other people's, you can57 gradually {move / space your way}58 a little bit upwards one 
year, and a little bit further upwards the second year, until someday the one who got the 
lower part will get all the upper fields as well! There's an old saying to that effect. It's a 
good one. And [yet] I say I want the upper part, and you won't give it to me!
60 Cà-bo: Just look at him, just look at him! Now he's even teaching you the way to rob 
other people of their possessions!
61 H: I'm not robbing anybody, I'm not robbing anybody! I [told] you I'd take the upper 
part even if there wasn't enough water. [But when I said] I'd take the upper part, what 
you said was "If it's a good place you take it for yourself!" So now I'm saying I'll take 
[land] down there, way under everybody else in the rocky plains down below! 
62 Cà-bo: Well, then, what about what you were saying there about digging your way 
upwards little by little into other peoples' [land]?
63 H: [Laughs] Oh, that! You know there's an old saying like that, don't you? "When you 
stake59 out a paddy-field, stake it out low! If you get a high field, you may get water, but 
cold water makes for bad paddy.60 If you get land below the others, one day you will get 
to be greater than they"--isn't that what they say? As our ancestors have said, "The first 
year while you hoe your weeds, undermine61 the paddy-field boundaries62 a little and 
push up a ways. The next year dig under again and advance upwards another length. 
[That is how you become] great." So I'm just trying to get other people's [property] for 
myself! 
64 Cà-bo: And here's where your greed comes in!
65 H: It's not greed at all! You guys don't want [that land]. It should be given to me!
66 Cà-bo: Then let each one of us go down and [work] only in his own place!63
67 H: Well--
68 Cà-bo: This business of knocking over and breaking up other people's boundaries, 
you could never--[the rest is inaudible].
69 H: [I'm not saying] "knock them over and break them up"--when the water weeds are 
thick around there, if you just dig at them a teeny-weeny eensy-weensy bit, the earth 
comes tumbling down [into your field]--if it's soaked with water. 
70 Cà-bo: Terrific, I'll go scrape yours away too, then!
71 H: [Laughing] I'm only kidding!64 You're talking nonsense!65
72 Pà-__: I'll knock them down too--[the rest is inaudible].
73 H: Will you do it honestly?66--Well, you know what people say, if they're narrow ones-
-if all the stripes [of land] are narrow, they'll say, "It's too long! I don't want it!"67 So let 
everybody measure off his own section squarely. 
74 Thû-yì: Well, if we divide it into stripes like that--
75 Cà-bo: [Interrupts] Don't give… [the beginning of this sentence is unintelligible]
76 Thû-yì: It doesn't look nice, it doesn't look nice.
77 H: When I'm making the boundaries68 between the sections, I'll certainly try to do it in 
such a way that each and every person gets enough.
78 Thû-yì: Well--
79 Pà-__: [Interrupts] I'll bet…. [The beginning of this sentence is unintelligible]
80 H: Oh, you people are talking at cross-purposes here69! Just talking at cross-
purposes. When the government is good enough70 to give us something, let everybody 
at least71 go and have a proper72 look at it! No matter what land falls to any individuals' 
lot.73
81 Thû-yì: It depends entirely on the government.
82 H: Look, when the government gives us something there's nothing for us to go 
complain about, is there? Shaw-hpa has suggested that we draw lots! You'd write 
down74 the paddy-field [locations] and put them in [the pool], then you'd draw the lots, 
and whichever piece75 you happen to get, it would be that land which you'd--that area 
there that you would get. 
83 Cà-bo: {It'd be impossible to do it that way / That would never work}. When you draw 
lots and you lose76 it's not a happy business. 
84 H: It's because nobody agrees on how to divide it up! So what can we do about it? 
85 Cà-bo: What'll happen is, when the lots are drawn a loser77 will--
86 H: The hell with losers! they just won't get it (=what they want), that's all. 
87 Thû-yì: Well, if we draw lots and I don't get a good place, I simply won't take it! Even 
if it falls to my lot. 
88 Pà-__: I'd take it, I'd take it! 
89 H: Well, if that's the way it is, there's nothing to be done with you people. 
… [two inaudible speeches follow]
	Well, if you won't even do what I advise you to, let somebody else tell you what to 
do, let somebody else tell you. We're all just quarreling with each other and not getting 
any place. 
90 Cà-bo: Let me decide, let me decide! I'll solve them for you, all these problems of 
yours. If there is anybody now who doesn't want to get any [land] as the headman said 
to, let him just give his share to the Li_u,78 all of it. 
91 H: Which place do you mean? 
92 Cà-bo: Even the [lands] at Pha-pu-ju.79
93 H: The {land / ones} at Pha-pu-ju, now--
94 Cà-bo: And let [the lands] at Cattle and Elephant Market be given away, too! You 
people are so stubborn80 right now! 
95 Li_u: I for one will take them!
96 H: So how are you guys going to go and earn a living in the future?
97 Li_u: No matter where we work for own living81 we'll just be scratching out a bare 
existence anyway.
98        : Well, if we haven't got places to live off, someday we'll be in trouble.
99 H: So for me, even if I don't get any [new land], I won't worry about it. If I do get 
some--
100 : That's why you're not going [out to look at the new lands], eh?
101 H: If I don't get any I won't be angry. If I do get some, I won't be happy.
102 Cà-bo: You're just saying that with your month!82 You do that with everything.
103 H: See here, mow, I've grown old working oldfields83 these many years84! {None of 
you people earn your living [that way] / Among you there're nobody who earns his living 
[that way]} Me, each year I work somebody else's oldfield, a different one each time. I 
go roaming around and earn my living.85
104 Li_u: Okay, keep scrabbling for a living then! All by yourself.
105 H: Scrabble I will. I'm not going.
106 Li_u: Stay sitting all forlorn86 and keep scratching for a living!
[A few inaudible words follow]
107 H: When people give you fellows advice, you don't pay any attention.87 Even when 
those important people advise you and tell you what to do, you still don't want to listen.
108 Li_u: The one who doesn't want to listen is you!
109 Cà-bo: You just sit under an eggplant-berry bush88 and scratch for a living!
110 H: There's a saying about the Lahu people89, that "when one of us is working, the 
other turns away. When one of us is moving, the other {reins him in / pulls him back}." 
We can't go on like this. We Lahu, no matter what we do--
111    : "While one man is climbing a tree, the other is pulling at his heels"--that saying is 
to the point here.
112 H: Because we don't want to obey the laws and customs of our superiors or even 
listen to what they're saying--if there's anything unpleasant to hear.90
113 Cà-bo: It's all because you didn't listen from the very beginning when people were 
telling you "Don't do this, don't do that, it's impossible!" So today, you are, it's nothing 
but troubles, whatever we do. No matter who teaches you, you won't listen!
114 H: Well, unless we let those government officials handle it for us I don't see what we 
can do. 
115    : Then let's leave it to the government. You people {stop quarreling about it / don't 
quarrel about it anymore}!

Footnotes

1. Lit: "has arrived on top of us."
2. yà_-ni ta l_ __-g_û-__ qai qo _: "beginning today and going on ahead."
3. "It is not that way!"
4. A Thai measure of area, equal to about ___ acres. The government has been making 
sporadic attempts to stamp out slash-and-burn agriculture on the mountainsides and to 
encourage sedentary cultivation of wet-rice. 
5. _____.
6. ti-mi: an irrigated paddy-field, cultivated in the lowlands. Opposed to h_ (_ y__-h_): a 
dry-rice field in the mountains.
7. This was a very real fear before the Thai government, working together with 
UNESCO, instituted an extremely effective anti-malaria campaign in 19__. 
8. This idea is expressed by the Pvnf th__ 'even so, anyway,' used here as an 
afterthought sentence all by itself. 
9. Lit: "They're only giving at the time they're giving."
10. This point is stressed repeatedly, since the usual Lahu practice is not to have the 
morning meal until about 11 A.M.
11. Lit: ch_ _ 'big person.'
12. The Thai officials nominally changed with administering Huey Tad live in the ni-
khom offices about a 20-minute walk up the mountain from the village. 
13. ká kà_ ká kì jâ: 'as for work, [I'm] very busy working.'
14. h___ 'get' is sometimes used for h___ gâ 'want to get.'
15. qhâ_ ph___ ve 'to be a village': i.e., to be a unified and prosperous community.
16. g_a 'get' i_ heg_e used for g_a gâ 'want to get.' See Note 14. The headman is clearly 
exaggerating the government's generosity as he tries to argue himself out of a tight 
spot. 
17. The next sentence of Càbo's is unintelligible because simultaneous with the 
beginning of the Headman's next speech.
18. <__-pâ __-k_>. 
19. For an explanation of the nikhom-system, see _____.
20. A relatively flat area at the base of the mountain where Huey Tad is situated. It is 
mostly already under cultivation by Thai peasants. [CHECK]
21. Place name - undecipherable on the tape.
22. n__ pa tí yò: "your father's the only one." A sarcastic expression meaning that 
something is impossible.
23. há-cú-p_: "breast-shape rock."
24. About $500. An inconceivably large sum of money for a Lahu.
25. ca a: lit: "have sought" = have found. a = the perfective Pv ta.
26. _u à_ â kh___ nè: 'it doesn't trouble them.'
27. Càbo is referring to the government's occasional attempts to enrich and diversify the 
village's agriculture by making little presents of plants or livestock. 
28. h_-p__-qh_ ch_ "jungle people; forest people."
29. i 'small' is used to mean both 'few, not numerous' and 'weak, unimportant.'
30. Lit: "when the era of our children and posterity arrives, it will be difficult."
31. mâ d__ ni p__: lit. "unable to think things through." For the usage of the Vv p__ to 
express qualities of character, see grammar, _____. 
32. This long speech is in elevated, sermoning style, as the headman speaks ex 
cathedra. 
33. Li_i's reply is inaudible on the tape, but the headman's next remark suggests that 
Li_i also likes the idea of irrigating the land below Titirock stream. 
34. tê t_ n__ tê t_ n__ te ve: "to do just a little at a time"
35. â m__ _e: "hasn't disappeared yet."
36. I.e., if your sons are still too young, etc.
37. fá ve: undoubtedly < Thai tàag.
38. "Because their offering it is only offering it for a time." __-yâ the c_ tí 'only 
temporarily.' A certain inconsistency in the headman's attitude is obvious, amusing, and 
intentional!
39. This passage is difficult because of the constant shifting in the headman's point of 
reference vis-à-vis the villages. Sometimes he calls himself _à 'I,' sometimes he refers 
to himself as n__ 'you,' through the villagers' eyes. Sometimes the villagers are n__-h_ 'you 
all, sometimes _à-h_ 'we.'
40. <g_a-câ-g_a-l___ tù> Lit: "something which will enable us to eat and lick." 
41. â qh_. qhe is apparently a verb meaning 'to be harmful.' But it is a hapax legomenon 
and must be checked. 
42. _a-thê: <Thai 'tycoon.' The rich Thai landowner who has adopted a semi-benevolent 
paternalistic attitude toward the nikhon Lahu. See How we came from Burma, -----.
43. Proverb: d__ mi qo g_à_ â mi. "When think-overtake, chase not overtake." That is, "by 
the time we realize what's happening it will be too late to do anything about it."
44. mâ + V + __: 'still not V.' But mâ + V + _e: 'not V yet'; see #45. 
45. _i v_: lit., 'lead [each other] away.'
46. _a-g_û-_a: apparently a jocular form for 'game animals.' g_û = 'crazy.' CHECK.
47. fâ_-p__: the brush-tailed porcupine
48. I.e., the Headman is suggesting they go hunting on their way to inspect the new 
fields the government is offering. This is by way of tempting more people to go, but is 
hardly a serious suggestion. A hunting expedition is an all-day affair, nor something to 
be sandwiched in between other activities. 
49. "if it's a not-being-able thing."
50. The headman first uses the Burmese word for 'government' (a-_ô-yà_), then 
corrects himself and uses the Thai word (lâ-thâ-bâ).
51. n__-_à-h_ "you and we"--i.e., inclusive we.
52. I.e., "a place that I too would like to get." Unlike the lands at Pha-pu-jaw in which the 
Headman has no interest.
53. The vV q___ here translates as 'instead.'
54. há-j___-le: "stone-_?_-?' Perhaps the name of a place. CHECK. 
55. qha-_wí h___ a: "Let us get equally."
56. Inaudible on the tape.
57. The conjunction à-mù expresses 'future probability'--here translated by 'can.'
58. nî qh___ a-cí kà tâ_ la: the meaning of kà is uncertain. Perhaps related to ka 'an 
interval, a space between.' CHECK.
59. v_ ve 'to lay claim to, stake out.'
60. The higher up the mountain the colder the water presumably.
61. qa-pâ_ 'dig?-collapse.' CHECK.
62. ti-mi t__ The __-t__ are earthen dikes forming the boundaries of a paddy-field. 
63. Lit: "Then whoever's [place], as for its where-extent, let it be a here-extent!"
64. Lit: "It's not that way."
65. Lit: "Yours isn't even human speech."
66. The purport of this remark is obscure since the previous speech was inaudible. 
67. I.e., if a field is narrow it is apt to be long-rectangular fields involve more footwork 
than squarer ones. 
68. Note the difference in meaning among these verbs: t___ 'measure, measure off'; p__ 
'share, divide'; t__ 'demarcate, make boundaries.'
69. j__ dà_ mâ h_ "discuss-mutually not-harmonize." The English 'here' translates chi.
70. qha-d___ "is good enough to."
71. "at least" translates the vV q___, which here means 'to Vh as a return of a favor.'
72. "proper" translates  qha-d___.
73. Lit: "wherever anybody happens to get it."
74. lì_ bù_ "to write letters," i.e., to write something down.
75. qh__ tê qú: It is not clear exactly what the classifier qú means--apparently it is 
classifying the pieces of paper, not the pieces of land. CHECK.
76. vè qo: vè is a hapax legomenon--"lose"? CHECK. Perhaps this is a mistranscription 
for v_ 'to lay a claim to.' In that case, the sentence would mean "When you claim [land] 
by drawing lots it's not {an easy / a happy} business."
77.  â-c__-pa: lit. "one who doesn't happen to [get a good place]."
78. A member of the Lisu tribe, resident for several years in Huey Tad.
79. pha-pù-cú. It seems likely that this is the same place as phâ-pù-c__, mentioned 
above, _____. 
80. t__ y_ ha: "hard to talk to" = stubborn.
81. qh__ te câ â te câ cò-'where we work-for-a-living not work-for-a-living, there__'
82. I.e., 'you don't really meant it.'
83. h_-(g___)-_a: a field that has already yielded a crop, an 'oldfield.' The headman 
professes to prefer working other people's oldfields to clearing new ones of his own. 
84. ta-lái qh___: check 1st syllable. ôo __ h_-_a_ talái qh___ te câ ve k__ la ò yâ
85. An impressive 5-verb concatenation: ca (vV) te (vV)-câ(Vh) tô (Vv) qai (Vv) ve.
86. ph____ 'above, lonely, forlorn.'
87. _u kh__ mâ na: "don't listen to their words." 
88. mâ-h_-p__ _ Thai m_khya phua_. Solanaceae torvum. A small shrub of the eggplant 
family whose bitter berries are eaten in curries. The English translation is m own 
coinage. 
89. Lâhu yâ qô_ ve qô_ qo: "if/when we say about the ones called Lahu people."
90. mâ h___ gâ ve kh__ qo: "if they are words which we do not want to get."
 










