86 Headman's Communication at a Meeting in Church
Cà-bí (Huey Tat)

1. You women who have come, if there are people[1] in your house, if there are people who 
haven't come, please tell all of them about it, OK?
2. Among all of use [2] who make up this community, we're always overloaded with all kinds of 
work, aren't we.
3. All the men, all the women, we always have work loaded upon us.
4. All kinds [of work].
5. These days when we're all so busy [with other things], even though there is work to be done 
in the village, you brethren haven't had a chance to know about it, right?
6. But now I'm going to tell you brethren [about it].
7. A while ago a preacher [3] was coming to visit us, so we were told "Go and welcome him."
8. We had heard about this in advance, you see.
9. We were to go and welcome him.
10. We {were supposed to/had} to help him with all of his things.
11. So last Tuesday, I went [4].
12. And on Saturday, Mehle's father [5] went and saw him off again.
13. So I've heard that we paid out ten baht for the expenses we had to help him with.
14. That's right, isn't it, ten baht?
Somebody 15. Yes.
Headman 16. We spent ten baht. [6]
17. So what shall we do about that money?
18. We ought to think about the question of this money, all the members of the committee. [7]
19. And our whole community, all of us, ought to listen to each other's opinions and think this 
over.
20. And I still have {other things/ more} to tell you, brethren.
21. Soon, when church is over, [8] if we have things to discuss in the committee room. We can 
discuss them in the committee room.
22. If there's nothing to discuss in the committee room, soon when church is over everybody 
please gather at my house for a while, OK?
23. There are matters I'd like to discuss. Let's consider them. There are several matters.
24. Brethren, please don't think "[I] don't want to go, since today is Sunday and I don't want to 
do a bad thing." [9]
25. If you're doing something good, it's good to do it even on Sunday.
26. In fact, if it wasn't today, if today wasn't Sunday, we wouldn't be seeing each other at all, 
would we!
27. Since we're so busy, everybody is off to his own place, his own field, his own mountain.
28. Unless it's Saturday or Sunday, we don't get to see each other at all.
29. Dor that reason if there are people who {don't/ won't} come, everybody tell them to!
30. You really must come [10], brethren, every house [in the village].
31. Unless somebody is {really/actually} sick.

[1] I.e., your menfolk.
[2] n__-_à_h_: lit "you and me". This is the way to express "inclusive 1st p. plural."
[3] This was a Karen pastor from a distant village.
[4] To meet him and bring him to our village.
[5] Villagers are frequently referred to by their children's names, a practice called teknonymy by 
anthropologists.
[6] At this time (mid-1960s) a baht was worth about 5 cents (20 baht to the dollar). Ten baht 
was a considerable amount of money in Huey Tat in those days.
[7] A committe to handle important matters in Christian villages, of which the headman was an ex 
officio member.
[8] c__-y__ yà_ p__ tê yân thâ: lit. "when [we've] finished going down [from] church".
[9] By breaking the Sabbath.
[10] mâ là ve mâ ph___: lit. "cannot not come."
