#86 C. The Smoker and the Non-smoker
83 H: Well, once upon a time there were two men. 84 One of them was a tobacco-
smoker, he used to smoke all the time. 84 He was a great smoker. 85 The other one 
didn't smoke. 86 His pipe--the smoker's pipe was a very fine one. 87 The inside36 of it 
was red and smooth, and it was streamlined37 and shiny, so that the non-smoker wanted 
to have it, and stole it away from him. 88 When he had gone and stolen it, the two of 
them then [a few words are inaudible] and they make a big count-case38 out of it. 89 
They made a big case of it, they were fighting with each other, and (the time came that) 
they reached the great official--the lord--the king39--and this king was a very shrewd 
man.40 90 He made the non-smoker {make a / wad of} tobacco, to put in the pipe. 91 
And he had the smoker crumple some tobacco too. 92 "Both of you crumple it and put it 
down here," he said. 93 He didn't have them wad it up one tobacco--er, I mean one man 
after the other42 [while they were there] together. 94 [Rather] he summoned one man at 
a time and had him {crumple it / wad it up}--the tobacco. 95 Well, then, after the tobacco 
had been wadded and placed [before him], he summoned the smoker. 96 "Come here, 
you!" he said to the owner of the pipe. 96 He came. 97 Then he summoned the one who 
had stolen the pipe too. 98 "Come here!" he said. 99 "If you smoke a pipe--er, you, if the 
pipe is really yours, try putting the tobacco you wadded into it," he said. 
	100 When he said, "Try putting it in," they went at it with a will43--and the one the 
smoker had made44 filled the bowl of the pipe perfectly. 101 The non-smoker's one was 
a big lump like this . . . 45 . . . because he didn't know….
102 He was jealous of someone else's pipe, and stole it, and even made a court case 
out of it and went before the king, but he couldn't win against the pipe-smoker! 103 THat 
fellow went and robbed someone else's property, went and stole someone else's 
possession--104 Then, after he had coveted it and stolen it, when it came to putting it to 
proper use,46 he had no idea of how to do it. 105 When someone forced him to make a 
wad for it, he crumpled up enough tobacco for {anyone / a person} to put into two pipes-
-he didn't know [{how to do it / any better}]. 106 He wanted to get a hold of his pipe so 
he brought the fellow46 to court, thinking all the time47 that if a serious issue were made 
of it48 he would win. 107 [But] it was in vain. 108 He went and stole another's property, 
and behaved like a miserable wretch.49 109 But the real pipe-smoker, in joy and 
gladness, got [back] his possession.50 
110 That's right, my boys! "Don't go sitting on someone else's stool," as the saying 
goes. If it's not your own stool-- 
111 T-y: (Teasing) Did you say "don't go shitting" or "don't go sitting"?51
112 Don't sit, I said! That man who stole the pipe couldn't best the other when it came 
right down to it, in the end.52
113 H: Mm-hm.

Footnotes
36. __-k_ 1. 'the innermost, hardest part of a log; the pith' 2. 'the inside of a tube'
37. phi ___ 'flat.' Here probably refers to its elegant shininess. CHECK.
38. à-mù-ló ph___ dà_ ve "to have a great case happen mutually"
39. The headman decides to make his story impressive by making the judge a king. 
40. Lit: "as for this king, his cleverness was very great."
41. _ú ch___ ve 'to crumple tobacco'--to tear off a chunk of tobacco from a large lump and 
squeeze it into a ball suitable for insertion into a pipe: only the owner of the pipe knew 
the proper size wad that would just fit into the pipe. 
42. The headman's slip of the tongue occurred at the beginning of the sentence, but the 
English word-order requires that it be translated late in the sentence.
43. g___ k_ a l_: g___ is a lively vV.
44. "the smoker's one" (_ú d__ pa tê mà).   
45. The inaudible part of the sentence must mean something like "and wouldn't go into 
the bowl, since he didn't know its exact size." 
46. q___ te ve q___: the first q___ implies the action takes place later. te is a pro-verb for 
'wad up'--i.e., 'do an action.' The second q___ is similar to the Pvnf kà_ 'even.'
47. "all the time" translates the reduplicated y__ g_â y__ g_â 'he'd win, he'd win [he thought].'
48. __-t__ __-na te ve. 
49. ch_ lù pa 'a ruined person, a person who has gone bad.'
50. In case one desires to impress the moral more strongly, one may add 109a: h__ khi 
chi ch_-lù-pa à_ _u m__ qh__ ve thà_ pat_ th_ qh_ m_-chw__ yù k_ _e ve gò cê. "And the 
king threw the wretch into jail for a long time, since he had stolen what belonged to 
another."
51. The original says "did you say tâ mi (_ don't catch) or tâ m_ (don't sit)." The 
humorous impertinence is, if anything, enhanced by the translation. 
52. Lit: "when the doing-thus time came, when the being-the end/last time came."

#86b D. The Three Lazy Men and the Princess 
114 Headman
	Well, then, let me tell you another story. 115 Listen carefully, everybody. 116 
Long, long ago, the story goes, there were some lazy men, three traders.53 117 They 
were resting54 in a certain place where several roads met, where three roads met. 118 
The first man,55 saying he was going off to trade, had sat down there,56 and would say 
"Ah, where are you going?" [to those who passed]. 119 One day [another] lazy man 
appeared. 120 [In response to the other's usual question] he said, "Oh, I'm doing some 
trading."57 121 "Have a seat here." 122 After a while a [third] man came along [one of 
the] roads to the place where the three roads met. 123 He arrived there. 124 And they 
all had a conversation. 
	125 "What do you do?," they said.
	126 "Nothing much.58 I go around trading," he said.
	127 "{What can you do (well)? / What are you good at?}" they said.
	128 All of them were sitting there and talking back and forth. 
	129 "Well, I know how to make crossbows," he said.
	130 "Well, then, you--what can you do?"
	131 "Oh, I know how to {tell fortunes / predict the future}59"--these three men 
[were talking like that]. 132 "Well, what can you do?" 133 "Oh, I can make crossbows." 
134 Thereupon they said, "What do you have to say, then, if you tell fortunes? 135 Try 
predicting the future, maestro,60" they said. 
	136 Well, he spoke, screwing his mouth up from one side to the other61: 137 "Hm, 
in a short while, at midday, we'll see62 that a hawk carrying a princess--a king's 
daughter--in his beak will fly over the lake here," he said. 138 Thus he foretold. 139 
"Well, didn't you say you could make crossbows?" 140 "Yes, I can (make crossbows)." 
141 And he made a crossbow. 142 Well, another of them said, "And what can you do?" 
143 "I know how to swim," he said. 144 As they were all talking like this, that which had 
just been foretold {came to pass / was fulfilled}. 145 It happened according to the 
prediction. 146 So, the crossbow was all made, and they stayed there together. 147 
When midday came, there was the hawk carrying the king's daughter, and he was 
already over the lake.63 148 So he took careful aim and fired off a shot, and they fell into 
the lake. 149 When they had fallen into the lake, the man who could swim immediately 
struck out swimming, and by his swimming rescued the princess who was out there--the 
young girl. 150 When he had swum back with her, the three of them [began to] {fight 
over / lay conflicting claims to} the girl. 151 They were arguing over who would marry 
her. 152 One of them, now, one of them wanted to marry her, saying "I foretold it, so I, 
the maestro, ought to marry her!" 153 "Well, you couldn't get her just by telling your 
fortunes--I had to swim out and get her!" 154 "If I hadn't shot him down with my 
crossbow you couldn't have gotten her by your swimming!" 155 Thus the three of them 
vied with each other. 
	156 You people think about it! Which one of them probably should have married 
her? Thank about it, everybody. 
157 Pà-__: You mean the queen157?
158 The one who shot [the arrow] ought to get her.
159 The swimmer!
160 T-y: It's the fortune-teller who should get her! If he hadn't foretold it they'd never 
have known.
161 Even if he foretold it, if he didn't swim he couldn't get her.
162 H: Well, they took the case to the king and told him about it--and how did it come 
out? "Who was the one who {passed by / created}158 first? Was it the fortune-teller? 
TO BE CONTINUED
   
 Footnotes
53. tâ ka te ve 'to tg_ade, be engaged in commerce.'
54. Lit., "sitting."  
55. Lit., "at first, one man…"
56. He sat down on his way, and didn't bother to get up again.
57. It is probable that the Headman reversed two sentences and meant to have "where 
are you going" come after "one day another lazy man appeared."
58. Lit: "I don't do anything."
59. m__-t__ thè_ ve. There is apparently a folk-etymology here. m__-t__ is prob. < Thai m__-
duu, but theg_e ag_e Lahu roots m__ 'be an elder, vevenerableand t__ 'words.' 
60. The Thai vocative m__ 'teacher' is used.
61. Fortune-tellers often speak out of the side of their months, to appear more 
impressive. 
62. The benefactive Pv lâ implies that the hawk's actions are directed at the men: 'for 
their benefit' in the sense that they will be the witnesses of the action. 
63. Lit., "and he had gotten and far as above the lake."
157. Pà-__ uses the word h__-khâ-ma instead of h__-khâ yâ-mî.
158. pha may mean either 'pass by' or 'create' (both < Shan), though neither makes 
much sense here. The King is supposed to be talking. The Headman brought this 
narrative to an abrupt close, but retold the story on another occasion. See below, # 
_____. 
