98 Resurrection of a Barking Deer and Fulfillment of a Prophecy

[former title" Barking Deer and Swallowed Berries, or He did it after all]

1. Once upon a time there was a married couple.[1]

2. They were very lazy.

3. They didn't work.

4. So day after day they just stayed home.

5. Well, one day came when they were getting hungry.

6. Since they were so hungry, they went off into the {forest/jungle} to dig for yams to eat.

7. While they were off to dig for yams to eat, they found a barking deer [2] that had choked to 
death on a wild gooseberry![3]

8. So then the two of them, husband and wife, carried the barking deer back home.

9. So they turned back and arrived home, and put it into a big basket for storing {rice/paddy}, 
and set some water on the fire to boil.

10. Meanwhile their children were playing around stroking the barking deer.

11. The kids were saying, "Are you the one that says pé? Are you the one that says pí?," joking 
and playfully stroking it.

12. Then all of a sudden what was {choking it/caught in its throat} was stroked back into [4] it[s 
stomach], and it jumped up and ran away.

13. So then this couple went to a fortune-teller [5] to ask a question.

14. He [6] said to the fortune-teller, "Oh, master, will I be able to get my animal back, or won't I 
be able to get it back?," he asked.

15a. The fortune-teller said, "Ah, that animal of yours you cannot get back.

15b. "If you try to do so, you will just have to lick your wife's 'thing'."[7]

16. At this he {retorted/answered back}, "Oh, you miserable fortune-telling sonofabitch!",[8] and 
{drove/chased} him away.

17. After this, when they reached a certain point [on their way home], rain came pouring down, 
and they got drenched and were freezing.

18. When they got back home, the husband and wife both sat down in front of the tripod in the 
fireplace and warmed themselves by the fire.

19. Then he caught sight of his wife's thing, and stuck a finger right inside,[9] and it disappeared 
in there. [When he took it out it was all wet, so] he wiped it off on the tripod.

20. When he wiped it off on the tripod, he [his finger] got bured, so he licked it vigorously.

21. Then all of a sudden he remembered.

22. "What the fortune-teller told me just now was true!", he realized.

Footnotes:

[1] ch_ 	tê 	ca. The storyteller uses the singular 3p pronoun y__ in what follows when 
referring to the couple
     Nqh	Num 	Clf 
[2] ch_-pí-qw___: A small deer (Cervulus muntjac; Muntiacus muntjac) about 3 feet tall, known 
as the best eating in the jungle, but now hunted virtually to extinction in thIland. Its cry, 
conventionally imitated as pé-pí in Lahu, somewhat resembles the barking of a dog. See DL: 835.
[3] qhâ_-cá-_i_: Sesbanea sesbans or Phyllanthus emblica. See DL:286.
[4] This complex verbal idea (stroke back into) is conveyed by a three-verb concatenation: _ô_       
qh___      k_.
											           Vn       
Vv        Vv
												stroke 
go back insert
Another way of saying this: g_ô-pe_ 	qh_ 	_ô_ 	yà_ e _e_ l_…
			        stomach	inside	stroke	descend
[5] m__ 'teacher; master; expert; possessor of occult knowledge' < Tai *cf, Si m___). See DL:1029.
[6] The pronoun is not expressed, but the context makes it clear that it is the husband who is 
doing the talking to the fortune-teller.
[7] m__ 'thing' is here used as a euphemism. Cf. also the expression _à m__ l___ 'lick my 
thing!', where it is not specified which thing is meant. See DL:1031.
[8] m__-khì-m__-t_l___ (ElabN): N1 + kh__ + N1 + t_l___ is a template for forming abusive 
insults to N1. See DL:371. khì 'shit' < Tai (cf. Si. khîi); the origin of t_l___ (evidently a Tai 
loanword) is obscure.
[9] g___ jû_ ph__: jû_ 'stick in'; the prehead versatile verb g___ and the posthead one ph__ 
both convey a lively flavor to the verbal event.
     vV Vn Vv
    drag      send forth
